Project Gutenberg's Alice's Adventures in Wonderland, by Lewis Carroll

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Alice's Adventures in Wonderland
       Illustrated by Arthur Rackham. With a Proem by Austin Dobson

Author: Lewis Carroll

Illustrator: Arthur Rackham

Release Date: May 19, 2009 [EBook #28885]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ALICE'S ADVENTURES IN WONDERLAND ***




Produced by Jana Srna, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by the
University of Florida Digital Collections.)











ALICE'S ADVENTURES IN WONDERLAND

[Illustration: "Alice"]

[Illustration:

          ALICE'S·ADVENTURES
          IN·WONDERLAND
          BY·LEWIS·CARROLL
          ILLUSTRATED·BY
          ARTHUR·RACKHAM

          WITH A PROEM BY AUSTIN DOBSON

          LONDON·WILLIAM·HEINEMANN
          NEW·YORK·DOUBLEDAY·PAGE·&·Co]

          PRINTED IN ENGLAND

          _'Tis two score years since CARROLL'S art,
             With topsy-turvy magic,
           Sent ALICE wondering through a part
             Half-comic and half-tragic._

          _Enchanting ALICE! Black-and-white
             Has made your deeds perennial;
           And naught save "Chaos and old Night"
             Can part you now from TENNIEL;_

          _But still you are a Type, and based
             In Truth, like LEAR and HAMLET;
           And Types may be re-draped to taste
             In cloth-of-gold or camlet._

          _Here comes afresh Costumier, then;
             That Taste may gain a wrinkle
           From him who drew with such deft pen
             The rags of RIP VAN WINKLE!_

                                   _AUSTIN DOBSON._



          All in the golden afternoon
            Full leisurely we glide;
          For both our oars, with little skill,
            By little arms are plied,
          While little hands make vain pretence
            Our wanderings to guide.

          Ah, cruel Three! In such an hour,
            Beneath such dreamy weather,
          To beg a tale of breath too weak
            To stir the tiniest feather!
          Yet what can one poor voice avail
            Against three tongues together?

          Imperious Prima flashes forth
            Her edict "to begin it"--
          In gentler tone Secunda hopes
            "There will be nonsense in it!"--
          While Tertia interrupts the tale
            Not _more_ than once a minute.

          Anon, to sudden silence won,
            In fancy they pursue
          The dream-child moving through a land
            Of wonders wild and new,
          In friendly chat with bird or beast--
            And half believe it true.

          And ever, as the story drained
            The wells of fancy dry.
          And faintly strove that weary one
            To put the subject by,
          "The rest next time--" "It _is_ next time!"
            The happy voices cry.

          Thus grew the tale of Wonderland:
            Thus slowly, one by one,
          Its quaint events were hammered out--
            And now the tale is done,
          And home we steer, a merry crew,
            Beneath the setting sun.

          Alice! a childish story take,
            And with a gentle hand
          Lay it where Childhood's dreams are twined
            In Memory's mystic band,
          Like pilgrim's wither'd wreath of flowers
            Pluck'd in a far-off land.




CONTENTS


                                                      PAGE

             I. DOWN THE RABBIT-HOLE                     1

            II. THE POOL OF TEARS                       13

           III. A CAUCUS-RACE AND A LONG TALE           24

            IV. THE RABBIT SENDS IN A LITTLE BILL       35

             V. ADVICE FROM A CATERPILLAR               49

            VI. PIG AND PEPPER                          64

           VII. A MAD TEA-PARTY                         82

          VIII. THE QUEEN'S CROQUET-GROUND              96

            IX. THE MOCK TURTLE'S STORY                111

             X. THE LOBSTER QUADRILLE                  126

            XI. WHO STOLE THE TARTS?                   139

           XII. ALICE'S EVIDENCE                       150




LIST OF THE PLATES


                                            _To face page_

          Alice                             _Frontispiece_

          The Pool of Tears                             22

          They all crowded round it panting and
             asking, "But who has won?"                 28

          "Why, Mary Ann, what are you doing out
             here?"                                     36

          Advice from a Caterpillar                     50

          An unusually large saucepan flew close
             by it, and very nearly carried it off      70

          It grunted again so violently that she
             looked down into its face in some alarm    74

          A Mad Tea-Party                               84

          The Queen turned angrily away from him
             and said to the Knave, "Turn them over"   100

          The Queen never left off quarrelling
             with the other players, and shouting
             "Off with his head!" or, "Off with her
             head!"                                    116

          The Mock Turtle drew a long breath and
             said, "That's very curious"               132

          Who stole the Tarts?                         140

          At this the whole pack rose up into the
             air, and came flying down upon her        158




CHAPTER I


[Sidenote: _Down the Rabbit-Hole_]

ALICE was beginning to get very tired of sitting by her
sister on the bank, and of having nothing to do: once or twice she had
peeped into the book her sister was reading, but it had no pictures or
conversations in it, "and what is the use of a book," thought Alice,
"without pictures or conversations?"

So she was considering in her own mind (as well as she could, for the
hot day made her feel very sleepy and stupid) whether the pleasure of
making a daisy-chain would be worth the trouble of getting up and
picking the daisies, when suddenly a White Rabbit with pink eyes ran
close by her.

There was nothing so _very_ remarkable in that; nor did Alice think it
so _very_ much out of the way to hear the Rabbit say to itself, "Oh
dear! Oh dear! I shall be too late!" (when she thought it over
afterwards, it occurred to her that she ought to have wondered at this,
but at the time it all seemed quite natural); but when the Rabbit
actually _took a watch out of its waistcoat-pocket_, and looked at it,
and then hurried on, Alice started to her feet, for it flashed across
her mind that she had never before seen a rabbit with either a
waistcoat-pocket, or a watch to take out of it, and burning with
curiosity, she ran across the field after it, and was just in time to
see it pop down a large rabbit-hole under the hedge.

In another moment down went Alice after it, never once considering how
in the world she was to get out again.

The rabbit-hole went straight on like a tunnel for some way, and then
dipped suddenly down, so suddenly that Alice had not a moment to think
about stopping herself before she found herself falling down what seemed
to be a very deep well.

[Illustration]

Either the well was very deep, or she fell very slowly, for she had
plenty of time as she went down to look about her, and to wonder what
was going to happen next. First, she tried to look down and make out
what she was coming to, but it was too dark to see anything; then she
looked at the sides of the well and noticed that they were filled with
cupboards and book-shelves: here and there she saw maps and pictures
hung upon pegs. She took down a jar from one of the shelves as she
passed; it was labelled "ORANGE MARMALADE," but to her disappointment it
was empty; she did not like to drop the jar for fear of killing
somebody underneath, so managed to put it into one of the cupboards as
she fell past it.

"Well!" thought Alice to herself. "After such a fall as this, I shall
think nothing of tumbling down stairs! How brave they'll all think me at
home! Why, I wouldn't say anything about it, even if I fell off the top
of the house!" (Which was very likely true.)

Down, down, down. Would the fall _never_ come to an end? "I wonder how
many miles I've fallen by this time?" she said aloud. "I must be getting
somewhere near the centre of the earth. Let me see: that would be four
thousand miles down. I think--" (for, you see, Alice had learnt several
things of this sort in her lessons in the schoolroom, and though this
was not a _very_ good opportunity for showing off her knowledge, as
there was no one to listen to her, still it was good practice to say it
over) "--yes, that's about the right distance--but then I wonder what
Latitude or Longitude I've got to?" (Alice had no idea what Latitude
was, or Longitude either, but thought they were nice grand words to
say.)

Presently she began again. "I wonder if I shall fall right _through_ the
earth! How funny it'll seem to come out among the people that walk with
their heads downwards! The Antipathies, I think--" (she was rather glad
there _was_ no one listening, this time, as it didn't sound at all the
right word) "--but I shall have to ask them what the name of the country
is, you know. Please, Ma'am, is this New Zealand or Australia?" (and she
tried to curtsey as she spoke--fancy _curtseying_ as you're falling
through the air! Do you think you could manage it?) "And what an
ignorant little girl she'll think me! No, it'll never do to ask: perhaps
I shall see it written up somewhere."

Down, down, down. There was nothing else to do, so Alice soon began
talking again. "Dinah'll miss me very much to-night, I should think!"
(Dinah was the cat.) "I hope they'll remember her saucer of milk at
tea-time. Dinah, my dear, I wish you were down here with me! There are
no mice in the air, I'm afraid, but you might catch a bat, and that's
very like a mouse, you know. But do cats eat bats, I wonder?" And here
Alice began to get rather sleepy, and went on saying to herself, in a
dreamy sort of way, "Do cats eat bats? Do cats eat bats?" and sometimes,
"Do bats eat cats?" for, you see, as she couldn't answer either
question, it didn't much matter which way she put it. She felt that she
was dozing off, and had just begun to dream that she was walking hand in
hand with Dinah, and saying to her very earnestly, "Now, Dinah, tell me
the truth: did you ever eat a bat?" when suddenly, thump! thump! down
she came upon a heap of sticks and dry leaves, and the fall was over.

Alice was not a bit hurt, and she jumped up on to her feet in a moment:
she looked up, but it was all dark overhead; before her was another long
passage, and the White Rabbit was still in sight, hurrying down it.
There was not a moment to be lost: away went Alice like the wind, and
was just in time to hear it say, as it turned a corner, "Oh my ears and
whiskers, how late it's getting!" She was close behind it when she
turned the corner, but the Rabbit was no longer to be seen: she found
herself in a long, low hall, which was lit up by a row of lamps hanging
from the roof.

There were doors all round the hall, but they were all locked; and when
Alice had been all the way down one side and up the other, trying every
door, she walked sadly down the middle, wondering how she was ever to
get out again.

Suddenly she came upon a little three-legged table, all made of solid
glass; there was nothing on it but a tiny golden key, and Alice's first
idea was that this might belong to one of the doors of the hall; but,
alas! either the locks were too large, or the key was too small, but at
any rate it would not open any of them. However, on the second time
round, she came upon a low curtain she had not noticed before, and
behind it was a little door about fifteen inches high: she tried the
little golden key in the lock, and to her great delight it fitted!

Alice opened the door and found that it led into a small passage, not
much larger than a rat-hole: she knelt down and looked along the passage
into the loveliest garden you ever saw. How she longed to get out of
that dark hall, and wander about among those beds of bright flowers and
those cool fountains, but she could not even get her head through the
doorway; "and even if my head would go through," thought poor Alice, "it
would be of very little use without my shoulders. Oh, how I wish I could
shut up like a telescope! I think I could, if I only knew how to begin."
For, you see, so many out-of-the-way things had happened lately, that
Alice had begun to think that very few things indeed were really
impossible.

There seemed to be no use in waiting by the little door, so she went
back to the table, half hoping she might find another key on it, or at
any rate a book of rules for shutting people up like telescopes: this
time she found a little bottle on it ("which certainly was not here
before," said Alice,) and tied round the neck of the bottle was a paper
label, with the words "DRINK ME" beautifully printed on it in large
letters.

It was all very well to say "Drink me," but the wise little Alice was
not going to do _that_ in a hurry. "No, I'll look first," she said, "and
see whether it's marked '_poison_' or not;" for she had read several
nice little stories about children who had got burnt, and eaten up by
wild beasts, and other unpleasant things, all because they _would_ not
remember the simple rules their friends had taught them: such as, that a
red-hot poker will burn you if you hold it too long; and that, if you
cut your finger _very_ deeply with a knife, it usually bleeds; and she
had never forgotten that, if you drink much from a bottle marked
"poison," it is almost certain to disagree with you, sooner or later.

However, this bottle was _not_ marked "poison," so Alice ventured to
taste it, and finding it very nice (it had, in fact, a sort of mixed
flavour of cherry-tart, custard, pineapple, roast turkey, coffee, and
hot buttered toast,) she very soon finished it off.

       *       *       *       *       *

"What a curious feeling!" said Alice. "I must be shutting up like a
telescope."

And so it was indeed: she was now only ten inches high, and her face
brightened up at the thought that she was now the right size for going
through that little door into that lovely garden. First, however, she
waited for a few minutes to see if she was going to shrink any further:
she felt a little nervous about this: "for it might end, you know," said
Alice to herself, "in my going out altogether, like a candle. I wonder
what I should be like then?" And she tried to fancy what the flame of a
candle looks like after the candle is blown out, for she could not
remember ever having seen such a thing.

After a while, finding that nothing more happened, she decided on going
into the garden at once; but, alas for poor Alice! when she got to the
door, she found she had forgotten the little golden key, and when she
went back to the table for it, she found she could not possibly reach
it: she could see it quite plainly through the glass, and she tried her
best to climb up one of the legs of the table, but it was too slippery;
and when she had tired herself out with trying, the poor little thing
sat down and cried.

"Come, there's no use in crying like that!" said Alice to herself,
rather sharply. "I advise you to leave off this minute!" She generally
gave herself very good advice (though she very seldom followed it), and
sometimes she scolded herself so severely as to bring tears into her
eyes; and once she remembered trying to box her own ears for having
cheated herself in a game of croquet she was playing against herself,
for this curious child was very fond of pretending to be two people.
"But it's no use now," thought poor Alice, "to pretend to be two people!
Why there's hardly enough of me left to make _one_ respectable person!"

Soon her eye fell on a little glass box that was lying under the table:
she opened it, and found in it a very small cake, on which the words
"EAT ME" were beautifully marked in currants. "Well, I'll eat it," said
Alice, "and if it makes me grow larger, I can reach the key; and if it
makes me grow smaller, I can creep under the door; so either way I'll
get into the garden, and I don't care which happens!"

She ate a little bit, and said anxiously to herself, "Which way? Which
way?" holding her hand on the top of her head to feel which way it was
growing, and she was quite surprised to find that she remained the same
size; to be sure, this is what generally happens when one eats cake,
but Alice had got so much into the way of expecting nothing but
out-of-the-way things to happen, that it seemed quite dull and stupid
for life to go on in the common way.

So she set to work, and very soon finished off the cake.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER II


[Sidenote: _Pool of Tears_]

"CURIOUSER and curiouser!" cried Alice (she was so much
surprised, that for a moment she quite forgot how to speak good
English); "now I'm opening out like the largest telescope that ever was!
Good-bye, feet!" (for when she looked down at her feet, they seemed to
be almost out of sight, they were getting so far off). "Oh, my poor
little feet, I wonder who will put on your shoes and stockings for you
now, dears? I'm sure _I_ sha'n't be able! I shall be a great deal too
far off to trouble myself about you: you must manage the best way you
can--but I must be kind to them," thought Alice, "or perhaps they won't
walk the way I want to go! Let me see: I'll give them a new pair of
boots every Christmas."

And she went on planning to herself how she would manage it. "They must
go by the carrier," she thought; "and how funny it'll seem, sending
presents to one's own feet! And how odd the directions will look!

          Alice's Right Foot, Esq.
              Hearthrug,
                  near the Fender,
                      (with Alice's love).

Oh dear, what nonsense I'm talking!"

Just then her head struck against the roof of the hall: in fact she was
now rather more than nine feet high, and she at once took up the little
golden key and hurried off to the garden door.

Poor Alice! It was as much as she could do, lying down on one side, to
look through into the garden with one eye; but to get through was more
hopeless than ever: she sat down and began to cry again.

"You ought to be ashamed of yourself," said Alice, "a great girl like
you" (she might well say this), "to go on crying in this way! Stop this
moment, I tell you!" But she went on all the same, shedding gallons of
tears, until there was a large pool all round her, about four inches
deep and reaching half down the hall.

[Illustration: CURIOUSER AND CURIOUSER]

After a time she heard a little pattering of feet in the distance, and
she hastily dried her eyes to see what was coming. It was the White
Rabbit returning, splendidly dressed, with a pair of white kid gloves in
one hand and a large fan in the other: he came trotting along in a great
hurry, muttering to himself as he came, "Oh! the Duchess, the Duchess!
Oh! won't she be savage if I've kept her waiting!" Alice felt so
desperate that she was ready to ask help of any one; so, when the
Rabbit came near her, she began, in a low, timid voice, "If you please,
sir----" The Rabbit started violently, dropped the white kid gloves and
the fan, and scurried away into the darkness as hard as he could go.

Alice took up the fan and gloves, and, as the hall was very hot, she
kept fanning herself all the time she went on talking! "Dear, dear! How
queer everything is to-day! And yesterday things went on just as usual.
I wonder if I've been changed during the night? Let me think: _was_ I
the same when I got up this morning? I almost think I can remember
feeling a little different. But if I'm not the same, the next question
is, who in the world am I? Ah, _that's_ the great puzzle!" And she began
thinking over all the children she knew that were of the same age as
herself, to see if she could have been changed for any of them.

"I'm sure I'm not Ada," she said, "for her hair goes in such long
ringlets, and mine doesn't go in ringlets at all; and I'm sure I can't
be Mabel, for I know all sorts of things, and she, oh! she knows such a
very little! Besides, _she's_ she, and _I'm_ I, and--oh dear, how
puzzling it all is! I'll try if I know all the things I used to know.
Let me see: four times five is twelve, and four times six is thirteen,
and four times seven is--oh dear! I shall never get to twenty at that
rate! However, the Multiplication Table doesn't signify: let's try
Geography. London is the capital of Paris, and Paris is the capital of
Rome, and Rome--no, _that's_ all wrong, I'm certain! I must have been
changed for Mabel! I'll try and say '_How doth the little----_'" and she
crossed her hands on her lap as if she were saying lessons, and began to
repeat it, but her voice sounded hoarse and strange, and the words did
not come the same as they used to do:--

          "How doth the little crocodile
             Improve his shining tail,
           And pour the waters of the Nile
             On every golden scale!

          "How cheerfully he seems to grin,
             How neatly spreads his claws,
           And welcomes little fishes in,
             With gently smiling jaws!"

"I'm sure those are not the right words," said poor Alice, and her eyes
filled with tears again as she went on. "I must be Mabel, after all, and
I shall have to go and live in that poky little house, and have next to
no toys to play with, and oh! ever so many lessons to learn! No, I've
made up my mind about it; if I'm Mabel, I'll stay down here! It'll be no
use their putting their heads down and saying, 'Come up again, dear!' I
shall only look up and say, 'Who am I then? Tell me that first, and
then, if I like being that person, I'll come up: if not, I'll stay down
here till I'm somebody else'--but, oh dear!" cried Alice with a sudden
burst of tears, "I do wish they _would_ put their heads down! I am so
_very_ tired of being all alone here!"

As she said this she looked down at her hands, and was surprised to see
that she had put on one of the Rabbit's little white kid gloves while
she was talking. "How _can_ I have done that?" she thought. "I must be
growing small again." She got up and went to the table to measure
herself by it, and found that, as nearly as she could guess, she was now
about two feet high, and was going on shrinking rapidly: she soon found
out that the cause of this was the fan she was holding, and she dropped
it hastily, just in time to avoid shrinking away altogether.

"That _was_ a narrow escape!" said Alice, a good deal frightened at the
sudden change, but very glad to find herself still in existence; "and
now for the garden!" and she ran with all speed back to the little door:
but alas! the little door was shut again, and the little golden key was
lying on the glass table as before, "and things are worse than ever,"
thought the poor child, "for I never was so small as this before, never!
And I declare it's too bad, that it is!"

As she said these words her foot slipped, and in another moment, splash!
she was up to her chin in salt water. Her first idea was that she had
somehow fallen into the sea, "and in that case I can go back by
railway," she said to herself. (Alice had been to the seaside once in
her life, and had come to the general conclusion, that wherever you go
to on the English coast you find a number of bathing machines in the
sea, some children digging in the sand with wooden spades, then a row
of lodging houses, and behind them a railway station.) However, she soon
made out that she was in the pool of tears which she had wept when she
was nine feet high.

"I wish I hadn't cried so much!" said Alice, as she swam about, trying
to find her way out. "I shall be punished for it now, I suppose, by
being drowned in my own tears! That _will_ be a queer thing, to be sure!
However, everything is queer to-day."

Just then she heard something splashing about in the pool a little way
off, and she swam nearer to make out what it was: at first she thought
it must be a walrus or hippopotamus, but then she remembered how small
she was now, and she soon made out that it was only a mouse that had
slipped in like herself.

"Would it be of any use now," thought Alice, "to speak to this mouse?
Everything is so out-of-the-way down here, that I should think very
likely it can talk: at any rate, there's no harm in trying." So she
began: "O Mouse, do you know the way out of this pool? I am very tired
of swimming about here, O Mouse!" (Alice thought this must be the right
way of speaking to a mouse; she had never done such a thing before, but
she remembered having seen in her brother's Latin Grammar, "A mouse--of
a mouse--to a mouse--a mouse--O mouse!") The Mouse looked at her rather
inquisitively, and seemed to her to wink with one of its little eyes,
but it said nothing.

"Perhaps it doesn't understand English," thought Alice; "I daresay it's
a French mouse, come over with William the Conqueror." (For, with all
her knowledge of history, Alice had no very clear notion how long ago
anything had happened.) So she began again: "Où est ma chatte?" which
was the first sentence in her French lesson-book. The Mouse gave a
sudden leap out of the water, and seemed to quiver all over with fright.
"Oh, I beg your pardon!" cried Alice hastily, afraid that she had hurt
the poor animal's feelings. "I quite forgot you didn't like cats."

"Not like cats!" cried the Mouse, in a shrill, passionate voice. "Would
_you_ like cats if you were me?"

"Well, perhaps not," said Alice in a soothing tone: "don't be angry
about it. And yet I wish I could show you our cat Dinah: I think you'd
take a fancy to cats if you could only see her. She is such a dear quiet
thing," Alice went on, half to herself, as she swam lazily about in the
pool, "and she sits purring so nicely by the fire, licking her paws and
washing her face--and she is such a nice soft thing to nurse--and she's
such a capital one for catching mice----oh, I beg your pardon!" cried
Alice again, for this time the Mouse was bristling all over, and she
felt certain it must be really offended. "We won't talk about her any
more if you'd rather not."

"We, indeed!" cried the Mouse, who was trembling down to the end of his
tail. "As if _I_ would talk on such a subject! Our family always _hated_
cats: nasty, low, vulgar things! Don't let me hear the name again!"

[Illustration: _The Pool of Tears_]

"I won't indeed!" said Alice, in a great hurry to change the subject of
conversation. "Are you--are you fond--of--of dogs?" The Mouse did not
answer, so Alice went on eagerly: "There is such a nice little dog near
our house I should like to show you! A little bright-eyed terrier, you
know, with oh, such long curly brown hair! And it'll fetch things
when you throw them, and it'll sit up and beg for its dinner, and all
sorts of things--I can't remember half of them--and it belongs to a
farmer, you know, and he says it's so useful, it's worth a hundred
pounds! He says it kills all the rats and--oh dear!" cried Alice in a
sorrowful tone, "I'm afraid I've offended it again!" For the Mouse was
swimming away from her as hard as it could go, and making quite a
commotion in the pool as it went.

So she called softly after it, "Mouse dear! Do come back again, and we
won't talk about cats or dogs either, if you don't like them!"

When the Mouse heard this, it turned round and swam slowly back to her:
its face was quite pale (with passion, Alice thought), and it said in a
low trembling voice, "Let us get to the shore, and then I'll tell you my
history, and you'll understand why it is I hate cats and dogs."

It was high time to go, for the pool was getting quite crowded with the
birds and animals that had fallen into it: there were a Duck and a Dodo,
a Lory and an Eaglet, and several other curious creatures. Alice led the
way, and the whole party swam to the shore.




CHAPTER III


[Sidenote: _A Caucus-race and a Long Tale_]

THEY were indeed a queer-looking party that assembled on
the bank--the birds with draggled feathers, the animals with their fur
clinging close to them, and all dripping wet, cross, and uncomfortable.

The first question of course was, how to get dry again: they had a
consultation about this, and after a few minutes it seemed quite natural
to Alice to find herself talking familiarly with them, as if she had
known them all her life. Indeed, she had quite a long argument with the
Lory, who at last turned sulky, and would only say, "I am older than
you, and must know better;" and this Alice would not allow without
knowing how old it was, and, as the Lory positively refused to tell its
age, there was no more to be said.

At last the Mouse, who seemed to be a person of authority among them,
called out "Sit down, all of you, and listen to me! _I'll_ soon make you
dry enough!" They all sat down at once, in a large ring, with the Mouse
in the middle. Alice kept her eyes anxiously fixed on it, for she felt
sure she would catch a bad cold if she did not get dry very soon.

"Ahem!" said the Mouse with an important air. "Are you all ready? This
is the driest thing I know. Silence all round, if you please! 'William
the Conqueror, whose cause was favoured by the pope, was soon submitted
to by the English, who wanted leaders, and had been of late much
accustomed to usurpation and conquest. Edwin and Morcar, the earls of
Mercia and Northumbria--'"

"Ugh!" said the Lory, with a shiver.

"I beg your pardon!" said the Mouse, frowning, but very politely. "Did
you speak?"

"Not I!" said the Lory hastily.

"I thought you did," said the Mouse, "--I proceed. 'Edwin and Morcar,
the earls of Mercia and Northumbria, declared for him: and even
Stigand, the patriotic Archbishop of Canterbury, found it advisable--'"

"Found _what_?" said the Duck.

"Found _it_," the Mouse replied rather crossly: "of course you know what
'it' means."

"I know what 'it' means well enough, when _I_ find a thing," said the
Duck; "it's generally a frog or a worm. The question is, what did the
archbishop find?"

The Mouse did not notice this question, but hurriedly went on, "'--found
it advisable to go with Edgar Atheling to meet William and offer him the
crown. William's conduct at first was moderate. But the insolence of his
Normans--' How are you getting on now, my dear?" it continued, turning
to Alice as it spoke.

"As wet as ever," said Alice in a melancholy tone; "doesn't seem to dry
me at all."

"In that case," said the Dodo solemnly, rising to its feet, "I move that
the meeting adjourn, for the immediate adoption of more energetic
remedies----"

"Speak English!" said the Eaglet. "I don't know the meaning of half
those long words, and, what's more, I don't believe you do either!" And
the Eaglet bent down its head to hide a smile: some of the other birds
tittered audibly.

"What I was going to say," said the Dodo in an offended tone, "was that
the best thing to get us dry would be a Caucus-race."

"What _is_ a Caucus-race?" said Alice; not that she much wanted to know,
but the Dodo had paused as if it thought that _somebody_ ought to speak,
and no one else seemed inclined to say anything.

"Why," said the Dodo, "the best way to explain it is to do it." (And, as
you might like to try the thing yourself some winter day, I will tell
you how the Dodo managed it.)

First it marked out a race-course, in a sort of circle, ("the exact
shape doesn't matter," it said,) and then all the party were placed
along the course, here and there. There was no "One, two, three, and
away," but they began running when they liked, and left off when they
liked, so that it was not easy to know when the race was over. However,
when they had been running half an hour or so, and were quite dry again,
the Dodo suddenly called "The race is over!" and they all crowded round
it, panting, and asking "But who has won?"

This question the Dodo could not answer without a great deal of thought,
and it stood for a long time with one finger pressed upon its forehead
(the position in which you usually see Shakespeare, in the pictures of
him), while the rest waited in silence. At last the Dodo said
"_Everybody_ has won, and _all_ must have prizes."

"But who is to give the prizes?" quite a chorus of voices asked.

"Why, _she_, of course," said the Dodo, pointing to Alice with one
finger; and the whole party at once crowded round her, calling out in a
confused way, "Prizes! Prizes!"

Alice had no idea what to do, and in despair she put her hand in her
pocket, and pulled out a box of comfits (luckily the salt water had not
got into it), and handed them round as prizes. There was exactly one
apiece all round.

          _They all crowded round it panting and asking,
          "But who has won?"_

[Illustration]

"But she must have a prize herself, you know," said the Mouse.

"Of course," the Dodo replied very gravely.

"What else have you got in your pocket?" it went on, turning to Alice.

"Only a thimble," said Alice sadly.

"Hand it over here," said the Dodo.

Then they all crowded round her once more, while the Dodo solemnly
presented the thimble, saying "We beg your acceptance of this elegant
thimble;" and, when it had finished this short speech, they all cheered.

Alice thought the whole thing very absurd, but they all looked so grave
that she did not dare to laugh; and, as she could not think of anything
to say, she simply bowed, and took the thimble, looking as solemn as she
could.

The next thing was to eat the comfits; this caused some noise and
confusion, as the large birds complained that they could not taste
theirs, and the small ones choked and had to be patted on the back.
However, it was over at last, and they sat down again in a ring, and
begged the Mouse to tell them something more.

"You promised to tell me your history, you know," said Alice, "and why
it is you hate--C and D," she added in a whisper, half afraid that it
would be offended again.

[Illustration]

"Mine is a long and sad tale!" said the Mouse, turning to Alice and
sighing.

"It _is_ a long tail, certainly," said Alice, looking down with wonder
at the Mouse's tail; "but why do you call it sad?" And she kept on
puzzling about it while the Mouse was speaking, so that her idea of the
tale was something like this:--

          "Fury said to
              a mouse, That
                  he met in the
                      house, 'Let
                        us both go
                          to law: _I_
                             will prose-
                              cute _you_.--
                             Come, I'll
                           take no de-
                         nial: We
                     must have
                 the trial;
              For really
             this morn-
           ing I've
          nothing
           to do.'
            Said the
             mouse to
              the cur,
               'Such a
                trial, dear
                  sir, With
                   no jury
                     or judge,
                       would
                        be wast-
                       ing our
                      breath.'
                    'I'll be
                   judge,
                 I'll be
               jury,'
             said
           cun-
          ning
           old
            Fury:
             'I'll
                try
                 the
                  whole
                   cause,
                       and
                     con-
                  demn
              you to
            death.'

"You are not attending!" said the Mouse to Alice severely. "What are you
thinking of?"

"I beg your pardon," said Alice very humbly: "you had got to the fifth
bend, I think?"

"I had _not_!" cried the Mouse, angrily.

"A knot!" said Alice, always ready to make herself useful, and looking
anxiously about her. "Oh, do let me help to undo it!"

"I shall do nothing of the sort," said the Mouse, getting up and walking
away. "You insult me by talking such nonsense!"

"I didn't mean it!" pleaded poor Alice. "But you're so easily offended,
you know!"

The Mouse only growled in reply.

"Please come back and finish your story!" Alice called after it. And the
others all joined in chorus, "Yes, please do!" but the Mouse only shook
its head impatiently and walked a little quicker.

"What a pity it wouldn't stay!" sighed the Lory, as soon as it was quite
out of sight; and an old Crab took the opportunity of saying to her
daughter, "Ah, my dear! Let this be a lesson to you never to lose
_your_ temper!" "Hold your tongue, Ma!" said the young Crab, a little
snappishly. "You're enough to try the patience of an oyster!"

"I wish I had our Dinah here, I know I do!" said Alice aloud, addressing
nobody in particular. "She'd soon fetch it back!"

"And who is Dinah, if I might venture to ask the question?" said the
Lory.

Alice replied eagerly, for she was always ready to talk about her pet:
"Dinah's our cat. And she's such a capital one for catching mice, you
ca'n't think! And oh, I wish you could see her after the birds! Why,
she'll eat a little bird as soon as look at it!"

This speech caused a remarkable sensation among the party. Some of the
birds hurried off at once; one old Magpie began wrapping itself up very
carefully, remarking "I really must be getting home; the night-air
doesn't suit my throat!" and a Canary called out in a trembling voice to
its children "Come away, my dears! It's high time you were all in bed!"
On various pretexts they all moved off, and Alice was soon left alone.

"I wish I hadn't mentioned Dinah!" she said to herself in a melancholy
tone. "Nobody seems to like her, down here, and I'm sure she's the best
cat in the world! Oh, my dear Dinah! I wonder if I shall ever see you
any more!" And here poor Alice began to cry again, for she felt very
lonely and low-spirited. In a little while, however, she again heard a
little pattering of footsteps in the distance, and she looked up
eagerly, half hoping that the Mouse had changed his mind, and was coming
back to finish his story.




CHAPTER IV


[Sidenote: _The Rabbit sends in a Little Bill_]

IT was the White Rabbit, trotting slowly back again, and
looking anxiously about as it went, as if it had lost something; and she
heard it muttering to itself, "The Duchess! The Duchess! Oh my dear
paws! Oh my fur and whiskers! She'll get me executed, as sure as ferrets
are ferrets! Where _can_ I have dropped them, I wonder?" Alice guessed
in a moment that it was looking for the fan and the pair of white kid
gloves, and she very good-naturedly began hunting about for them, but
they were nowhere to be seen--everything seemed to have changed since
her swim in the pool, and the great hall, with the glass table and the
little door, had vanished completely.

Very soon the Rabbit noticed Alice, as she went hunting about, and
called out to her in an angry tone, "Why, Mary Ann, what _are_ you
doing out here? Run home this moment, and fetch me a pair of gloves and
a fan! Quick, now!" And Alice was so much frightened that she ran off at
once in the direction it pointed to, without trying to explain the
mistake it had made.

"He took me for his housemaid," she said to herself as she ran. "How
surprised he'll be when he finds out who I am! But I'd better take him
his fan and gloves--that is, if I can find them." As she said this, she
came upon a neat little house, on the door of which was a bright brass
plate with the name "W. RABBIT" engraved upon it. She went in without
knocking, and hurried up stairs, in great fear lest she should meet the
real Mary Ann, and be turned out of the house before she had found the
fan and gloves.

[Illustration: "_Why, Mary Ann, what are you doing out here?_"]

"How queer it seems," Alice said to herself, "to be going messages for a
rabbit! I suppose Dinah'll be sending me on messages next!" And she
began fancying the sort of thing that would happen: "'Miss Alice! Come
here directly, and get ready for your walk!' 'Coming in a minute, nurse!
But I've got to watch this mouse-hole till Dinah comes back, and see
that the mouse doesn't get out.' Only I don't think," Alice went on,
"that they'd let Dinah stop in the house if it began ordering people
about like that!"

By this time she had found her way into a tidy little room with a table
in the window, and on it (as she had hoped) a fan and two or three pairs
of tiny white kid gloves: she took up the fan and a pair of the gloves,
and was just going to leave the room, when her eye fell upon a little
bottle that stood near the looking-glass. There was no label this time
with the words "DRINK ME," but nevertheless she uncorked it and put it
to her lips. "I know _something_ interesting is sure to happen," she
said to herself, "whenever I eat or drink anything; so I'll just see
what this bottle does. I do hope it will make me grow large again, for
really I'm quite tired of being such a tiny little thing!"

It did so indeed, and much sooner than she had expected: before she had
drunk half the bottle, she found her head pressing against the ceiling,
and had to stoop to save her neck from being broken. She hastily put
down the bottle, saying to herself "That's quite enough--I hope I
sha'n't grow any more--As it is, I can't get out at the door--I do wish
I hadn't drunk quite so much!"

Alas! it was too late to wish that! She went on growing, and growing,
and very soon had to kneel down on the floor: in another minute there
was not even room for this, and she tried the effect of lying down with
one elbow against the door, and the other arm curled round her head.
Still she went on growing, and, as a last resource, she put one arm out
of the window, and one foot up the chimney, and said to herself "Now I
can do no more, whatever happens. What _will_ become of me?"

Luckily for Alice, the little magic bottle had now had its full effect,
and she grew no larger: still it was very uncomfortable, and, as there
seemed to be no sort of chance of her ever getting out of the room
again, no wonder she felt unhappy.

"It was much pleasanter at home," thought poor Alice, "when one wasn't
always growing larger and smaller, and being ordered about by mice and
rabbits. I almost wish I hadn't gone down that rabbit-hole--and
yet--and yet--it's rather curious, you know, this sort of life! I do
wonder what _can_ have happened to me! When I used to read fairy-tales,
I fancied that kind of thing never happened, and now here I am in the
middle of one! There ought to be a book written about me, that there
ought! And when I grow up, I'll write one--but I'm grown up now," she
added in a sorrowful tone; "at least there's no room to grow up any more
_here_."

"But then," thought Alice, "shall I _never_ get any older than I am now?
That'll be a comfort, one way--never to be an old woman--but
then--always to have lessons to learn! Oh, I shouldn't like _that_!"

"Oh, you foolish Alice!" she answered herself. "How can you learn
lessons in here? Why, there's hardly room for _you_, and no room at all
for any lesson-books!"

And so she went on, taking first one side and then the other, and making
quite a conversation of it altogether; but after a few minutes she heard
a voice outside, and stopped to listen.

"Mary Ann! Mary Ann!" said the voice. "Fetch me my gloves this moment!"
Then came a little pattering of feet on the stairs. Alice knew it was
the Rabbit coming to look for her, and she trembled till she shook the
house, quite forgetting that she was now about a thousand times as large
as the Rabbit, and had no reason to be afraid of it.

Presently the Rabbit came up to the door, and tried to open it; but, as
the door opened inwards, and Alice's elbow was pressed hard against it,
that attempt proved a failure. Alice heard it say to itself "Then I'll
go round and get in at the window."

"_That_ you won't" thought Alice, and, after waiting till she fancied
she heard the Rabbit just under the window, she suddenly spread out her
hand, and made a snatch in the air. She did not get hold of anything,
but she heard a little shriek and a fall, and a crash of broken glass,
from which she concluded that it was just possible it had fallen into a
cucumber-frame, or something of the sort.

Next came an angry voice--the Rabbit's--"Pat! Pat! Where are you?" And
then a voice she had never heard before, "Sure then I'm here! Digging
for apples, yer honour!"

"Digging for apples, indeed!" said the Rabbit angrily. "Here! Come and
help me out of _this_!" (Sounds of more broken glass.)

"Now tell me, Pat, what's that in the window?"

"Sure, it's an arm, yer honour." (He pronounced it "arrum.")

"An arm, you goose! Who ever saw one that size? Why, it fills the whole
window!"

"Sure, it does, yer honour? but it's an arm for all that."

"Well, it's got no business there, at any rate: go and take it away!"

There was a long silence after this, and Alice could only hear whispers
now and then; such as, "Sure, I don't like it, yer honour, at all, at
all!" "Do as I tell you, you coward!" and at last she spread out her
hand again, and made another snatch in the air. This time there were
_two_ little shrieks, and more sounds of broken glass. "What a number of
cucumber-frames there must be!" thought Alice. "I wonder what they'll do
next! As for pulling me out of the window, I only wish they _could_!
I'm sure _I_ don't want to stay in here any longer!"

She waited for some time without hearing anything more: at last came a
rumbling of little cart-wheels, and the sound of a good many voices all
talking together: she made out the words: "Where's the other
ladder?--Why I hadn't to bring but one; Bill's got the other--Bill!
Fetch it here, lad!--Here, put 'em up at this corner--No, tie 'em
together first--they don't reach half high enough yet--Oh! they'll do
well enough; don't be particular--Here, Bill! catch hold of this
rope--Will the roof bear?--Mind that loose slate--Oh, it's coming down!
Heads below!" (a loud crash)--"Now, who did that?--It was Bill, I
fancy--Who's to go down the chimney?--Nay, _I_ sha'n't! _You_ do
it!--_That_ I won't, then! Bill's to go down--Here, Bill! the master
says you've to go down the chimney!"

"Oh! So Bill's got to come down the chimney, has he?" said Alice to
herself. "Why, they seem to put everything upon Bill! I wouldn't be in
Bill's place for a good deal: this fireplace is narrow, to be sure; but
I _think_ I can kick a little!"

She drew her foot as far down the chimney as she could, and waited till
she heard a little animal (she couldn't guess of what sort it was)
scratching and scrambling about in the chimney close above her: then,
saying to herself "This is Bill," she gave one sharp kick, and waited to
see what would happen next.

The first thing she heard was a general chorus of "There goes Bill!"
then the Rabbit's voice alone--"Catch him, you by the hedge!" then
silence, and then another confusion of voices--"Hold up his head--Brandy
now--Don't choke him--How was it, old fellow? What happened to you? Tell
us all about it!"

At last came a little feeble, squeaking voice, ("That's Bill," thought
Alice,) "Well, I hardly know--No more, thank ye; I'm better now--but I'm
a deal too flustered to tell you--all I know is, something comes at me
like a Jack-in-the-box, and up I goes like a sky-rocket!"

"So you did, old fellow!" said the others.

"We must burn the house down!" said the Rabbit's voice. And Alice
called out as loud as she could, "If you do, I'll set Dinah at you!"

There was a dead silence instantly, and Alice thought to herself "I
wonder what they _will_ do next! If they had any sense, they'd take the
roof off." After a minute or two they began moving about again, and
Alice heard the Rabbit say "A barrowful will do, to begin with."

"A barrowful of _what_?" thought Alice. But she had not long to doubt,
for the next moment a shower of little pebbles came rattling in at the
window, and some of them hit her in the face. "I'll put a stop to this,"
she said to herself, and shouted out "You'd better not do that again!"
which produced another dead silence.

Alice noticed with some surprise that the pebbles were all turning into
little cakes as they lay on the floor, and a bright idea came into her
head. "If I eat one of these cakes," she thought, "it's sure to make
_some_ change in my size; and, as it can't possibly make me larger, it
must make me smaller, I suppose."

So she swallowed one of the cakes, and was delighted to find that she
began shrinking directly. As soon as she was small enough to get through
the door, she ran out of the house, and found quite a crowd of little
animals and birds waiting outside. The poor little Lizard, Bill, was in
the middle, being held up by two guinea-pigs, who were giving it
something out of a bottle. They all made a rush at Alice the moment she
appeared; but she ran off as hard as she could, and soon found herself
safe in a thick wood.

"The first thing I've got to do," said Alice to herself, as she wandered
about in the wood, "is to grow to my right size again; and the second
thing is to find my way into that lovely garden. I think that will be
the best plan."

It sounded an excellent plan, no doubt, and very neatly and simply
arranged; the only difficulty was, that she had not the smallest idea
how to set about it; and, while she was peering about anxiously among
the trees, a little sharp bark just over her head made her look up in a
great hurry.

An enormous puppy was looking down at her with large round eyes, and
feebly stretching out one paw, trying to touch her. "Poor little
thing!" said Alice, in a coaxing tone, and she tried hard to whistle to
it; but she was terribly frightened all the time at the thought that it
might be hungry, in which case it would be very likely to eat her up in
spite of all her coaxing.

Hardly knowing what she did, she picked up a little bit of stick, and
held it out to the puppy; whereupon the puppy jumped into the air off
all its feet at once, with a yelp of delight, and rushed at the stick,
and made believe to worry it; then Alice dodged behind a great thistle,
to keep herself from being run over; and, the moment she appeared on the
other side, the puppy made another rush at the stick, and tumbled head
over heels in its hurry to get hold of it; then Alice, thinking it was
very like having a game of play with a cart-horse, and expecting every
moment to be trampled under its feet, ran round the thistle again; then
the puppy began a series of short charges at the stick, running a little
way forwards each time and a long way back, and barking hoarsely all the
while, till at last it sat down a good way off, panting, with its
tongue hanging out of its mouth, and its great eyes half shut.

This seemed to Alice a good opportunity for making her escape; so she
set off at once, and ran till she was quite tired and out of breath, and
till the puppy's bark sounded quite faint in the distance.

"And yet what a dear little puppy it was!" said Alice, as she leant
against a buttercup to rest herself, and fanned herself with one of the
leaves. "I should have liked teaching it tricks very much, if--if I'd
only been the right size to do it! Oh, dear! I'd nearly forgotten that
I've got to grow up again! Let me see--how _is_ it to be managed? I
suppose I ought to eat or drink something or other; but the great
question is, what?"

The great question certainly was, what? Alice looked all round her at
the flowers and the blades of grass, but she could not see anything that
looked like the right thing to eat or drink under the circumstances.
There was a large mushroom growing near her, about the same height as
herself; and, when she had looked under it, and on both sides of it, and
behind it, it occurred to her that she might as well look and see what
was on the top of it.

She stretched herself up on tiptoe, and peeped over the edge of the
mushroom, and her eyes immediately met those of a large blue
caterpillar, that was sitting on the top with its arms folded, quietly
smoking a long hookah, and taking not the smallest notice of her or of
anything else.




CHAPTER V


[Sidenote: _Advice from a Caterpillar_]

THE Caterpillar and Alice looked at each other for some
time in silence: at last the Caterpillar took the hookah out of its
mouth, and addressed her in a languid, sleepy voice.

"Who are _you_?" said the Caterpillar.

This was not an encouraging opening for a conversation. Alice replied,
rather shyly, "I hardly know, sir, just at present--at least I know who
I _was_ when I got up this morning, but I think I must have been changed
several times since then."

"What do you mean by that?" said the Caterpillar sternly. "Explain
yourself!"

"I can't explain _myself_, I'm afraid, sir," said Alice, "because I'm
not myself, you see."

"I don't see," said the Caterpillar.

"I'm afraid I can't put it more clearly," Alice replied very politely,
"for I can't understand it myself to begin with; and being so many
different sizes in a day is very confusing."

"It isn't," said the Caterpillar.

"Well, perhaps you haven't found it so yet," said Alice, "but when you
have to turn into a chrysalis--you will some day, you know--and then
after that into a butterfly, I should think you'll feel it a little
queer, won't you?"

"Not a bit," said the Caterpillar.

"Well, perhaps your feelings may be different," said Alice; "all I know
is, it would feel very queer to _me_."

"You!" said the Caterpillar contemptuously. "Who are _you_?"

Which brought them back again to the beginning of the conversation.
Alice felt a little irritated at the Caterpillar's making such _very_
short remarks, and she drew herself up and said, very gravely, "I think
you ought to tell me who _you_ are, first."

"Why?" said the Caterpillar.

[Illustration: _Advice from a Caterpillar_]

Here was another puzzling question; and as Alice could not think of any
good reason, and as the Caterpillar seemed to be in a _very_
unpleasant state of mind, she turned away.

"Come back!" the Caterpillar called after her. "I've something important
to say!"

This sounded promising, certainly: Alice turned and came back again.

"Keep your temper," said the Caterpillar.

"Is that all?" said Alice, swallowing down her anger as well as she
could.

"No," said the Caterpillar.

Alice thought she might as well wait, as she had nothing else to do, and
perhaps after all it might tell her something worth hearing. For some
minutes it puffed away without speaking, but at last it unfolded its
arms, took the hookah out of its mouth again, and said, "So you think
you're changed, do you?"

"I'm afraid I am, sir," said Alice; "I can't remember things as I
used--and I don't keep the same size for ten minutes together!"

"Can't remember _what_ things?" said the Caterpillar.

"Well, I've tried to say '_How doth the little busy bee_,' but it all
came different!" Alice replied in a very melancholy voice.

"Repeat '_You are old, Father William_,'" said the Caterpillar.

Alice folded her hands, and began:--

          "You are old, Father William," the young man said,
            "And your hair has become very white;
          And yet you incessantly stand on your head--
            Do you think, at your age, it is right?"

          "In my youth," Father William replied to his son,
            "I feared it might injure the brain;
          But, now that I'm perfectly sure I have none,
            Why, I do it again and again."

          "You are old," said the youth, "as I mentioned before,
            And have grown most uncommonly fat;
          Yet you turned a back-somersault in at the door--
            Pray, what is the reason of that?"

          "In my youth," said the sage, as he shook his grey locks,
            "I kept all my limbs very supple
          By the use of this ointment--one shilling the box--
            Allow me to sell you a couple?"

          "You are old," said the youth, "and your jaws are too weak
            For anything tougher than suet;
          Yet you finished the goose, with the bones and the beak--
            Pray, how did you manage to do it?"

          "In my youth," said his father, "I took to the law
            And argued each case with my wife;
          And the muscular strength, which it gave to my jaw,
            Has lasted the rest of my life."

          "You are old," said the youth, "one would hardly suppose
            That your eye was as steady as ever;
          Yet you balanced an eel on the end of your nose--
            What made you so awfully clever?"

          "I have answered three questions, and that is enough,"
            Said his father; "don't give yourself airs!
          Do you think I can listen all day to such stuff?
            Be off, or I'll kick you down stairs!"

"That is not said right," said the Caterpillar.

"Not _quite_ right, I'm afraid," said Alice, timidly; "some of the
words have got altered."

"It is wrong from beginning to end," said the Caterpillar, decidedly,
and there was silence for some minutes.

The Caterpillar was the first to speak.

"What size do you want to be?" it asked.

"Oh, I'm not particular as to size," Alice hastily replied; "only one
doesn't like changing so often, you know."

"I _don't_ know," said the Caterpillar.

Alice said nothing: she had never been so much contradicted in all her
life before, and she felt that she was losing her temper.

"Are you content now?" said the Caterpillar.

"Well, I should like to be a _little_ larger, sir, if you wouldn't
mind," said Alice: "three inches is such a wretched height to be."

"It is a very good height indeed!" said the Caterpillar angrily, rearing
itself upright as it spoke (it was exactly three inches high).

"But I'm not used to it!" pleaded poor Alice in a piteous tone. And she
thought to herself, "I wish the creatures wouldn't be so easily
offended!"

"You'll get used to it in time," said the Caterpillar; and it put its
hookah into its mouth and began smoking again.

This time Alice waited patiently until it chose to speak again. In a
minute or two the Caterpillar took the hookah out of its mouth and
yawned once or twice, and shook itself. Then it got down off the
mushroom, and crawled away into the grass, merely remarking as it went,
"One side will make you grow taller, and the other side will make you
grow shorter."

"One side of _what_? The other side of _what_?" thought Alice to
herself.

"Of the mushroom," said the Caterpillar, just as if she had asked it
aloud; and in another moment it was out of sight.

Alice remained looking thoughtfully at the mushroom for a minute, trying
to make out which were the two sides of it; and as it was perfectly
round, she found this a very difficult question. However, at last she
stretched her arms round it as far as they would go, and broke off a bit
of the edge with each hand.

"And now which is which?" she said to herself, and nibbled a little of
the right-hand bit to try the effect: the next moment she felt a violent
blow underneath her chin: it had struck her foot!

[Illustration]

She was a good deal frightened by this very sudden change, but she felt
that there was no time to be lost, as she was shrinking rapidly; so she
set to work at once to eat some of the other bit. Her chin was pressed
so closely against her foot that there was hardly room to open her
mouth; but she did it at last, and managed to swallow a morsel of the
left-hand bit.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Come, my head's free at last!" said Alice in a tone of delight, which
changed into alarm in another moment, when she found that her shoulders
were nowhere to be found: all she could see, when she looked down, was
an immense length of neck, which seemed to rise like a stalk out of a
sea of green leaves that lay far below her.

"What _can_ all that green stuff be?" said Alice. "And where have my
shoulders got to? And oh, my poor hands, how is it I ca'n't see you?"
She was moving them about as she spoke, but no result seemed to follow,
except a little shaking among the distant green leaves.

As there seemed to be no chance of getting her hands up to her head, she
tried to get her head down to them, and was delighted to find that her
neck would bend about easily in any direction, like a serpent. She had
just succeeded in curving it down into a graceful zigzag, and was going
to dive in among the leaves, which she found to be nothing but the tops
of the trees under which she had been wandering, when a sharp hiss made
her draw back in a hurry: a large pigeon had flown into her face, and
was beating her violently with its wings.

"Serpent!" screamed the Pigeon.

"I'm _not_ a serpent!" said Alice indignantly. "Let me alone!"

"Serpent, I say again!" repeated the Pigeon, but in a more subdued tone,
and added with a kind of a sob, "I've tried every way, and nothing seems
to suit them!"

"I haven't the least idea what you're talking about," said Alice.

"I've tried the roots of trees, and I've tried banks, and I've tried
hedges," the Pigeon went on, without attending to her; "but those
serpents! There's no pleasing them!"

Alice was more and more puzzled, but she thought there was no use in
saying anything more till the Pigeon had finished.

"As if it wasn't trouble enough hatching the eggs," said the Pigeon;
"but I must be on the look-out for serpents night and day! Why, I
haven't had a wink of sleep these three weeks!"

"I'm very sorry you've been annoyed," said Alice, who was beginning to
see its meaning.

[Illustration]

"And just as I'd taken the highest tree in the wood," continued the
Pigeon, raising its voice to a shriek, "and just as I was thinking I
should be free of them at last, they must needs come wriggling down from
the sky! Ugh, Serpent!"

"But I'm _not_ a serpent, I tell you!" said Alice. "I'm a---- I'm a
----"

"Well! _What_ are you?" said the Pigeon. "I can see you're trying to
invent something!"

"I--I'm a little girl," said Alice, rather doubtfully, as she remembered
the number of changes she had gone through that day.

"A likely story indeed!" said the Pigeon in a tone of the deepest
contempt. "I've seen a good many little girls in my time, but never
_one_ with such a neck as that! No, no! You're a serpent; and there's no
use denying it. I suppose you'll be telling me next that you never
tasted an egg!"

"I _have_ tasted eggs, certainly," said Alice, who was a very truthful
child; "but little girls eat eggs quite as much as serpents do, you
know."

"I don't believe it," said the Pigeon; "but if they do, why then
they're a kind of serpent, that's all I can say."

This was such a new idea to Alice, that she was quite silent for a
minute or two, which gave the Pigeon the opportunity of adding, "You're
looking for eggs, I know _that_ well enough; and what does it matter to
me whether you're a little girl or a serpent?"

"It matters a good deal to _me_," said Alice hastily; "but I'm not
looking for eggs, as it happens; and if I was, I shouldn't want _yours_:
I don't like them raw."

"Well, be off, then!" said the Pigeon in a sulky tone, as it settled
down again into its nest. Alice crouched down among the trees as well as
she could, for her neck kept getting entangled among the branches, and
every now and then she had to stop and untwist it. After a while she
remembered that she still held the pieces of mushroom in her hands, and
she set to work very carefully, nibbling first at one and then at the
other, and growing sometimes taller and sometimes shorter, until she had
succeeded in bringing herself down to her usual height.

It was so long since she had been anything near the right size, that it
felt quite strange at first; but she got used to it in a few minutes,
and began talking to herself, as usual. "Come, there's half my plan done
now! How puzzling all these changes are! I'm never sure what I'm going
to be, from one minute to another! However, I've got back to my right
size: the next thing is, to get into that beautiful garden--how _is_
that to be done, I wonder?" As she said this, she came suddenly upon an
open place, with a little house in it about four feet high. "Whoever
lives there," thought Alice, "it'll never do to come upon them _this_
size: why, I should frighten them out of their wits!" So she began
nibbling at the right-hand bit again, and did not venture to go near the
house till she had brought herself down to nine inches high.




CHAPTER VI


[Sidenote: _Pig and Pepper_]

FOR a minute or two she stood looking at the house, and
wondering what to do next, when suddenly a footman in livery came
running out of the wood--(she considered him to be a footman because he
was in livery: otherwise, judging by his face only, she would have
called him a fish)--and rapped loudly at the door with his knuckles. It
was opened by another footman in livery, with a round face and large
eyes like a frog; and both footmen, Alice noticed, had powdered hair
that curled all over their heads. She felt very curious to know what it
was all about, and crept a little way out of the wood to listen.

The Fish-Footman began by producing from under his arm a great letter,
nearly as large as himself, and this he handed over to the other,
saying, in a solemn tone, "For the Duchess. An invitation from the
Queen to play croquet." The Frog-Footman repeated, in the same solemn
tone, only changing the order of the words a little, "From the Queen. An
invitation for the Duchess to play croquet."

Then they both bowed low, and their curls got entangled together.

Alice laughed so much at this, that she had to run back into the wood
for fear of their hearing her; and, when she next peeped out, the
Fish-Footman was gone, and the other was sitting on the ground near the
door, staring stupidly up into the sky.

Alice went timidly up to the door and knocked.

"There's no use in knocking," said the Footman, "and that for two
reasons. First, because I'm on the same side of the door as you are;
secondly, because they're making such a noise inside, no one could
possibly hear you." And certainly there was a most extraordinary noise
going on within--a constant howling and sneezing, and every now and then
a great crash, as if a dish or kettle had been broken to pieces.

"Please, then," said Alice, "how am I to get in?"

"There might be some sense in your knocking," the Footman went on
without attending to her, "if we had the door between us. For instance,
if you were _inside_, you might knock, and I could let you out, you
know." He was looking up into the sky all the time he was speaking, and
this Alice thought decidedly uncivil. "But perhaps he can't help it,"
she said to herself: "his eyes are so _very_ nearly at the top of his
head. But at any rate he might answer questions. How am I to get in?"
she repeated aloud.

"I shall sit here," the Footman remarked, "till to-morrow----"

At this moment the door of the house opened, and a large plate came
skimming out, straight at the Footman's head: it just grazed his nose,
and broke to pieces against one of the trees behind him.

"----or next day, maybe," the Footman continued in the same tone,
exactly as if nothing had happened.

"How am I to get in?" asked Alice again in a louder tone.

"_Are_ you to get in at all?" said the Footman. "That's the first
question, you know."

[Illustration]

It was, no doubt: only Alice did not like to be told so. "It's really
dreadful," she muttered to herself, "the way all the creatures argue.
It's enough to drive one crazy!"

The Footman seemed to consider this a good opportunity for repeating his
remark, with variations. "I shall sit here," he said, "on and off, for
days and days."

"But what am _I_ to do?" said Alice.

"Anything you like," said the Footman, and began whistling.

"Oh, there's no use in talking to him," said Alice desperately: "he's
perfectly idiotic!" And she opened the door and went in.

The door led right into a large kitchen, which was full of smoke from
one end to the other: the Duchess was sitting on a three-legged stool in
the middle, nursing a baby, the cook was leaning over the fire, stirring
a large cauldron which seemed to be full of soup.

"There's certainly too much pepper in that soup!" Alice said to herself,
as well as she could for sneezing.

There was certainly too much of it in the air. Even the Duchess sneezed
occasionally; and the baby was sneezing and howling alternately without
a moment's pause. The only things in the kitchen that did not sneeze,
were the cook, and a large cat which was sitting on the hearth and
grinning from ear to ear.

"Please would you tell me," said Alice a little timidly, for she was not
quite sure whether it was good manners for her to speak first, "why your
cat grins like that?"

"It's a Cheshire cat," said the Duchess, "and that's why. Pig!"

She said the last word with such sudden violence that Alice quite
jumped; but she saw in another moment that it was addressed to the baby,
and not to her, so she took courage, and went on again:

"I didn't know that Cheshire cats always grinned; in fact, I didn't know
that cats _could_ grin."

"They all can," said the Duchess; "and most of 'em do."

"I don't know of any that do," Alice said very politely, feeling quite
pleased to have got into a conversation.

"You don't know much," said the Duchess; "and that's a fact."

Alice did not at all like the tone of this remark, and thought it would
be as well to introduce some other subject of conversation. While she
was trying to fix on one, the cook took the cauldron of soup off the
fire, and at once set to work throwing everything within her reach at
the Duchess and the baby--the fire-irons came first; then followed a
shower of saucepans, plates, and dishes. The Duchess took no notice of
them even when they hit her; and the baby was howling so much already,
that it was quite impossible to say whether the blows hurt it or not.

"Oh, _please_ mind what you're doing!" cried Alice, jumping up and down
in an agony of terror. "Oh, there goes his _precious_ nose"; as an
unusually large saucepan flew close by it, and very nearly carried it
off.

"If everybody minded their own business," the Duchess said in a hoarse
growl, "the world would go round a deal faster than it does."

[Illustration: _An unusually large saucepan flew close by it, and very
nearly carried it off_]

"Which would _not_ be an advantage," said Alice, who felt very glad to
get an opportunity of showing off a little of her knowledge. "Just think
what work it would make with the day and night! You see the earth
takes twenty-four hours to turn round on its axis----"

"Talking of axes," said the Duchess, "chop off her head."

Alice glanced rather anxiously at the cook, to see if she meant to take
the hint; but the cook was busily engaged in stirring the soup, and did
not seem to be listening, so she ventured to go on again: "Twenty-four
hours, I _think_; or is it twelve? I----"

"Oh, don't bother _me_," said the Duchess; "I never could abide
figures!" And with that she began nursing her child again, singing a
sort of lullaby to it as she did so, and giving it a violent shake at
the end of every line:

          "Speak roughly to your little boy,
            And beat him when he sneezes:
          He only does it to annoy,
            Because he knows it teases."

CHORUS

          (In which the cook and the baby joined):
          "Wow! wow! wow!"

While the Duchess sang the second verse of the song, she kept tossing
the baby violently up and down, and the poor little thing howled so,
that Alice could hardly hear the words:

          "I speak severely to my boy,
            I beat him when he sneezes;
          For he can thoroughly enjoy
            The pepper when he pleases!"

          CHORUS.

          "Wow! wow! wow!"

"Here! you may nurse it a bit if you like!" the Duchess said to Alice,
flinging the baby at her as she spoke. "I must go and get ready to play
croquet with the Queen," and she hurried out of the room. The cook threw
a frying-pan after her as she went out, but it just missed her.

Alice caught the baby with some difficulty, as it was a queer-shaped
little creature, and held out its arms and legs in all directions, "just
like a star-fish," thought Alice. The poor little thing was snorting
like a steam-engine when she caught it, and kept doubling itself up and
straightening itself out again, so that altogether, for the first minute
or two, it was as much as she could do to hold it.

As soon as she had made out the proper way of nursing it, (which was to
twist it up into a knot, and then keep tight hold of its right ear and
left foot, so as to prevent its undoing itself,) she carried it out into
the open air. "If I don't take this child away with me," thought Alice,
"they're sure to kill it in a day or two: wouldn't it be murder to leave
it behind?" She said the last words out loud, and the little thing
grunted in reply (it had left off sneezing by this time). "Don't grunt,"
said Alice; "that's not at all a proper way of expressing yourself."

The baby grunted again, and Alice looked very anxiously into its face to
see what was the matter with it. There could be no doubt that it had a
_very_ turn-up nose, much more like a snout than a real nose; also its
eyes were getting extremely small for a baby: altogether Alice did not
like the look of the thing at all. "But perhaps it was only sobbing,"
she thought, and looked into its eyes again, to see if there were any
tears.

No, there were no tears. "If you're going to turn into a pig, my dear,"
said Alice, seriously, "I'll have nothing more to do with you. Mind
now!" The poor little thing sobbed again (or grunted, it was impossible
to say which), and they went on for some while in silence.

Alice was just beginning to think to herself, "Now, what am I to do with
this creature when I get it home?" when it grunted again, so violently,
that she looked down into its face in some alarm. This time there could
be _no_ mistake about it: it was neither more nor less than a pig, and
she felt that it would be quite absurd for her to carry it any further.

So she set the little creature down, and felt quite relieved to see it
trot quietly away into the wood. "If it had grown up," she said to
herself, "it would have made a dreadfully ugly child: but it makes
rather a handsome pig, I think." And she began thinking over other
children she knew, who might do very well as pigs, and was just saying
to herself, "if one only knew the right way to change them----" when she
was a little startled by seeing the Cheshire Cat sitting on a bough of a
tree a few yards off.

[Illustration: _It grunted again so violently that she looked down into
its face in some alarm_]

The Cat only grinned when it saw Alice. It looked good-natured, she
thought: still it had _very_ long claws and a great many teeth, so she
felt that it ought to be treated with respect.

[Illustration]

"Cheshire Puss," she began, rather timidly, as she did not at all know
whether it would like the name: however, it only grinned a little wider.
"Come, it's pleased so far," thought Alice, and she went on. "Would you
tell me, please, which way I ought to go from here?"

"That depends a good deal on where you want to get to," said the Cat.

"I don't much care where----" said Alice.

"Then it doesn't matter which way you go," said the Cat.

"---- so long as I get _somewhere_," Alice added as an explanation.

"Oh, you're sure to do that," said the Cat, "if you only walk long
enough."

Alice felt that this could not be denied, so she tried another question.
"What sort of people live about here?"

"In _that_ direction," the Cat said, waving its right paw round, "lives
a Hatter: and in _that_ direction," waving the other paw, "lives a March
Hare. Visit either you like: they're both mad."

"But I don't want to go among mad people," Alice remarked.

"Oh, you ca'n't help that," said the Cat: "we're all mad here. I'm mad.
You're mad."

"How do you know I'm mad?" said Alice.

"You must be," said the Cat, "or you wouldn't have come here."

Alice didn't think that proved it at all; however, she went on. "And how
do you know that you're mad?"

"To begin with," said the Cat, "a dog's not mad. You grant that?"

"I suppose so," said Alice.

"Well, then," the Cat went on, "you see a dog growls when it's angry,
and wags its tail when it's pleased. Now _I_ growl when I'm pleased, and
wag my tail when I'm angry. Therefore I'm mad."

"_I_ call it purring, not growling," said Alice.

"Call it what you like," said the Cat. "Do you play croquet with the
Queen to-day?"

"I should like it very much," said Alice, "but I haven't been invited
yet."

"You'll see me there," said the Cat and vanished.

Alice was not much surprised at this, she was getting so used to queer
things happening. While she was looking at the place where it had been,
it suddenly appeared again.

"By-the-bye, what became of the baby?" said the Cat. "I'd nearly
forgotten to ask."

"It turned into a pig," Alice quietly said, just as if it had come back
in a natural way.

"I thought it would," said the Cat, and vanished again.

Alice waited a little, half expecting to see it again, but it did not
appear, and after a minute or two she walked on in the direction in
which the March Hare was said to live. "I've seen hatters before," she
said to herself; "the March Hare will be much the most interesting, and
perhaps as this is May, it won't be raving mad--at least not so mad as
it was in March." As she said this, she looked up, and there was the Cat
again, sitting on the branch of a tree.

"Did you say pig, or fig?" said the Cat.

"I said pig," replied Alice; "and I wish you wouldn't keep appearing and
vanishing so suddenly: you make one quite giddy."

"All right," said the Cat; and this time it vanished quite slowly,
beginning with the end of the tail, and ending with the grin, which
remained some time after the rest of it had gone.

"Well! I've often seen a cat without a grin," thought Alice; "but a grin
without a cat! It's the most curious thing I ever saw in all my life."

[Illustration]

She had not gone much farther before she came in sight of the house of
the March Hare: she thought it must be the right house, because the
chimneys were shaped like ears and the roof was thatched with fur. It
was so large a house, that she did not like to go nearer till she had
nibbled some more of the left-hand bit of mushroom, and raised herself,
to about two feet high: even then she walked up towards it rather
timidly, saying to herself, "Suppose it should be raving mad after all!
I almost wish I'd gone to see the Hatter instead!"




CHAPTER VII


[Sidenote: _A Mad Tea-party_]

THERE was a table set out under a tree in front of the
house, and the March Hare and the Hatter were having tea at it: a
Dormouse was sitting between them, fast asleep, and the other two were
using it as a cushion resting their elbows on it, and talking over its
head. "Very uncomfortable for the Dormouse," thought Alice; "only as
it's asleep, suppose it doesn't mind."

The table was a large one, but the three were all crowded together at
one corner of it. "No room! No room!" they cried out when they saw Alice
coming. "There's _plenty_ of room!" said Alice indignantly, and she sat
down in a large arm-chair at one end of the table.

"Have some wine," the March Hare said in an encouraging tone.

Alice looked all round the table, but there was nothing on it but tea.
"I don't see any wine," she remarked.

"There isn't any," said the March Hare.

"Then it wasn't very civil of you to offer it," said Alice angrily.

"It wasn't very civil of you to sit down without being invited," said
the March Hare.

"I didn't know it was _your_ table," said Alice; "it's laid for a great
many more than three."

"Your hair wants cutting," said the Hatter. He had been looking at Alice
for some time with great curiosity, and this was his first speech.

"You should learn not to make personal remarks," Alice said with some
severity; "it's very rude."

The Hatter opened his eyes very wide on hearing this; but all he _said_
was "Why is a raven like a writing-desk?"

"Come, we shall have some fun now!" thought Alice. "I'm glad they've
begun asking riddles.--I believe I can guess that," she added aloud.

"Do you mean that you think you can find out the answer to it?" said
the March Hare.

"Exactly so," said Alice.

"Then you should say what you mean," the March Hare went on.

"I do," Alice hastily replied; "at least--at least I mean what I
say--that's the same thing, you know."

"Not the same thing a bit!" said the Hatter. "Why, you might just as
well say that 'I see what I eat' is the same thing as 'I eat what I
see'!"

"You might just as well say," added the March Hare, "that 'I like what I
get' is the same thing as 'I get what I like'!"

"You might just as well say," added the Dormouse, which seemed to be
talking in his sleep, "that 'I breathe when I sleep' is the same thing
as 'I sleep when I breathe'!"

"It _is_ the same thing with you," said the Hatter; and here the
conversation dropped, and the party sat silent for a minute, while Alice
thought over all she could remember about ravens and writing-desks,
which wasn't much.

[Illustration: _A Mad Tea Party_]

The Hatter was the first to break the silence. "What day of the month
is it?" he said, turning to Alice: he had taken his watch out of his
pocket, and was looking at it uneasily, shaking it every now and then,
and holding it to his ear.

Alice considered a little, and then said "The fourth."

"Two days wrong!" sighed the Hatter. "I told you butter would not suit
the works!" he added, looking angrily at the March Hare.

"It was the _best_ butter," the March Hare meekly replied.

"Yes, but some crumbs must have got in as well," the Hatter grumbled:
"you shouldn't have put it in with the bread-knife."

The March Hare took the watch and looked at it gloomily: then he dipped
it into his cup of tea, and looked at it again: but he could think of
nothing better to say than his first remark, "It was the _best_ butter,
you know."

Alice had been looking over his shoulder with some curiosity. "What a
funny watch!" she remarked. "It tells the day of the month, and doesn't
tell what o'clock it is!"

"Why should it?" muttered the Hatter. "Does _your_ watch tell you what
year it is?"

"Of course not," Alice replied very readily: "but that's because it
stays the same year for such a long time together."

"Which is just the case with _mine_," said the Hatter.

Alice felt dreadfully puzzled. The Hatter's remark seemed to have no
meaning in it, and yet it was certainly English. "I don't quite
understand," she said, as politely as she could.

"The Dormouse is asleep again," said the Hatter, and he poured a little
hot tea upon its nose.

The Dormouse shook its head impatiently, and said, without opening its
eyes, "Of course, of course; just what I was going to remark myself."

"Have you guessed the riddle yet?" the Hatter said, turning to Alice
again.

"No, I give it up," Alice replied: "what's the answer?"

"I haven't the slightest idea," said the Hatter.

"Nor I," said the March Hare.

Alice sighed wearily. "I think you might do something better with the
time," she said, "than wasting it asking riddles with no answers."

"If you knew Time as well as I do," said the Hatter, "you wouldn't talk
about wasting _it_. It's _him_."

"I don't know what you mean," said Alice.

"Of course you don't!" the Hatter said, tossing his head contemptuously.
"I daresay you never spoke to Time!"

"Perhaps not," Alice cautiously replied: "but I know I have to beat time
when I learn music."

"Ah! that accounts for it," said the Hatter. "He won't stand beating.
Now, if you only kept on good terms with him, he'd do almost anything
you liked with the clock. For instance, suppose it were nine o'clock in
the morning, just time to begin lessons: you'd only have to whisper a
hint to Time, and round goes the clock in a twinkling! Half-past one,
time for dinner!"

("I only wish it was," the March Hare said to itself in a whisper.)

"That would be grand, certainly," said Alice thoughtfully: "but then--I
shouldn't be hungry for it, you know."

"Not at first, perhaps," said the Hatter: "but you could keep it to
half-past one as long as you liked."

"Is that the way _you_ manage?" Alice asked.

The Hatter shook his head mournfully. "Not I!" he replied. "We
quarrelled last March----just before _he_ went mad, you know----"
(pointing with his teaspoon to the March Hare), "it was at the great
concert given by the Queen of Hearts, and I had to sing

          'Twinkle, twinkle, little bat!
          How I wonder what you're at!'

You know that song, perhaps?"

"I've heard something like it," said Alice.

"It goes on, you know," the Hatter continued, "in this way:--

          'Up above the world you fly,
          Like a tea-tray in the sky.
                      Twinkle, twinkle----'"

Here the Dormouse shook itself, and began singing in its sleep
"_Twinkle, twinkle, twinkle, twinkle_----" and went on so long that they
had to pinch it to make it stop.

"Well, I'd hardly finished the first verse," said the Hatter, "when the
Queen jumped up and bawled out 'He's murdering the time! Off with his
head!'"

"How dreadfully savage!" exclaimed Alice.

"And ever since that," the Hatter went on in a mournful tone, "he won't
do a thing I ask! It's always six o'clock now."

A bright idea came into Alice's head. "Is that the reason so many
tea-things are put out here?" she asked.

"Yes, that's it," said the Hatter with a sigh: "it's always tea-time,
and we've no time to wash the things between whiles."

"Then you keep moving round, I suppose?" said Alice.

"Exactly so," said the Hatter: "as the things get used up."

"But what happens when you come to the beginning again?" Alice ventured
to ask.

"Suppose we change the subject," the March Hare interrupted, yawning.
"I'm getting tired of this. I vote the young lady tells us a story."

"I'm afraid I don't know one," said Alice, rather alarmed at the
proposal.

"Then the Dormouse shall!" they both cried. "Wake up, Dormouse!" And
they pinched it on both sides at once.

The Dormouse slowly opened his eyes. "I wasn't asleep," he said in a
hoarse, feeble voice: "I heard every word you fellows were saying."

"Tell us a story!" said the March Hare.

"Yes, please do!" pleaded Alice.

"And be quick about it," added the Hatter, "or you'll be asleep again
before it's done."

"Once upon a time there were three little sisters," the Dormouse began
in a great hurry; "and their names were Elsie, Lacie, and Tillie; and
they lived at the bottom of a well----"

"What did they live on?" said Alice, who always took a great interest in
questions of eating and drinking.

"They lived on treacle," said the Dormouse, after thinking a minute or
two.

"They couldn't have done that, you know," Alice gently remarked; "they'd
have been ill."

"So they were," said the Dormouse; "_very_ ill."

Alice tried a little to fancy to herself what such an extraordinary way
of living would be like, but it puzzled her too much, so she went on:
"But why did they live at the bottom of a well?"

"Take some more tea," the March Hare said to Alice, very earnestly.

"I've had nothing yet," Alice replied in an offended tone, "so I can't
take more."

"You mean you can't take _less_," said the Hatter; "it's very easy to
take _more_ than nothing."

"Nobody asked _your_ opinion," said Alice.

"Who's making personal remarks now?" the Hatter asked triumphantly.

Alice did not quite know what to say to this: so she helped herself to
some tea and bread-and-butter, and then turned to the Dormouse, and
repeated her question. "Why did they live at the bottom of a well?"

The Dormouse again took a minute or two to think about it, and then
said, "It was a treacle-well."

"There's no such thing!" Alice was beginning very angrily, but the
Hatter and the March Hare went "Sh! sh!" and the Dormouse sulkily
remarked: "If you can't be civil, you'd better finish the story for
yourself."

"No, please go on!" Alice said very humbly. "I won't interrupt you
again. I dare say there may be _one_."

"One, indeed!" said the Dormouse indignantly. However, he consented to
go on. "And so these three little sisters--they were learning to draw,
you know----"

"What did they draw?" said Alice, quite forgetting her promise.

"Treacle," said the Dormouse, without considering at all this time.

"I want a clean cup," interrupted the Hatter: "let's all move one place
on."

He moved as he spoke, and the Dormouse followed him: the March Hare
moved into the Dormouse's place, and Alice rather unwillingly took the
place of the March Hare. The Hatter was the only one who got any
advantage from the change: and Alice was a good deal worse off than
before, as the March Hare had just upset the milk-jug into his plate.

Alice did not wish to offend the Dormouse again, so she began very
cautiously: "But I don't understand. Where did they draw the treacle
from?"

"You can draw water out of a water-well," said the Hatter; "so I should
think you could draw treacle out of a treacle-well--eh, stupid!"

"But they were _in_ the well," Alice said to the Dormouse, not choosing
to notice this last remark.

"Of course they were," said the Dormouse; "----well in."

This answer so confused poor Alice that she let the Dormouse go on for
some time without interrupting it.

"They were learning to draw," the Dormouse went on, yawning and rubbing
its eyes, for it was getting very sleepy; "and they drew all manner of
things--everything that begins with an M----"

"Why with an M?" said Alice.

"Why not?" said the March Hare.

Alice was silent.

The Dormouse had closed its eyes by this time, and was going off into a
dose; but, on being pinched by the Hatter, it woke up again with a
little shriek, and went on: "----that begins with an M, such as
mouse-traps, and the moon, and memory, and muchness--you know you say
things are 'much of a muchness'--did you ever see such a thing as a
drawing of a muchness?"

"Really, now you ask me," said Alice, very much confused, "I don't
think----"

"Then you shouldn't talk," said the Hatter.

This piece of rudeness was more than Alice could bear: she got up in
great disgust and walked off; the Dormouse fell asleep instantly, and
neither of the others took the least notice of her going, though she
looked back once or twice, half hoping that they would call after her:
the last time she saw them, they were trying to put the Dormouse into
the teapot.

"At any rate I'll never go _there_ again!" said Alice as she picked her
way through the wood. "It's the stupidest tea-party I ever was at in all
my life!"

Just as she said this, she noticed that one of the trees had a door
leading right into it. "That's very curious!" she thought. "But
everything's curious to-day. I think I may as well go in at once." And
in she went.

Once more she found herself in the long hall, and close to the little
glass table. "Now I'll manage better this time," she said to herself,
and began by taking the little golden key, and unlocking the door that
led into the garden. Then she set to work nibbling at the mushroom (she
had kept a piece of it in her pocket) till she was about a foot high:
then she walked down the little passage: and _then_--she found herself
at last in the beautiful garden, among the bright flower-beds and the
cool fountains.




CHAPTER VIII


[Sidenote: _The Queen's Croquet-Ground_]

A LARGE rose-tree stood near the entrance of the garden:
the roses growing on it were white, but there were three gardeners at
it, busily painting them red. Alice thought this a very curious thing,
and she went nearer to watch them, and just as she came up to them she
heard one of them say "Look out now, Five! Don't go splashing paint over
me like that!"

"I couldn't help it," said Five, in a sulky tone. "Seven jogged my
elbow."

On which Seven looked up and said, "That's right, Five! Always lay the
blame on others!"

"_You'd_ better not talk!" said Five. "I heard the Queen say only
yesterday you deserved to be beheaded!"

"What for?" said the one who had first spoken.

"That's none of _your_ business, Two!" said Seven.

"Yes, it _is_ his business!" said Five. "And I'll tell him--it was for
bringing the cook tulip-roots instead of onions."

Seven flung down his brush, and had just begun "Well, of all the unjust
things----" when his eye chanced to fall upon Alice, as she stood
watching them, and he checked himself suddenly: the others looked round
also, and all of them bowed low.

"Would you tell me," said Alice, a little timidly, "why you are painting
those roses?"

Five and Seven said nothing, but looked at Two. Two began in a low
voice, "Why, the fact is, you see, Miss, this here ought to have been a
_red_ rose-tree, and we put a white one in by mistake; and if the Queen
was to find it out, we should all have our heads cut off, you know. So
you see, Miss, we're doing our best, afore she comes, to----" At this
moment, Five, who had been anxiously looking across the garden, called
out "The Queen! The Queen!" and the three gardeners instantly threw
themselves flat upon their faces. There was a sound of many footsteps,
and Alice looked round, eager to see the Queen.

First came ten soldiers carrying clubs; these were all shaped like the
three gardeners, oblong and flat, with their hands and feet at the
corners: next the ten courtiers; these were ornamented all over with
diamonds, and walked two and two, as the soldiers did. After these came
the royal children; there were ten of them, and the little dears came
jumping merrily along hand in hand, in couples; they were all ornamented
with hearts. Next came the guests, mostly Kings and Queens, and among
them Alice recognised the White Rabbit: it was talking in a hurried,
nervous manner, smiling at everything that was said, and went by without
noticing her. Then followed the Knave of Hearts, carrying the King's
crown on a crimson velvet cushion; and last of all this grand
procession, came THE KING AND QUEEN OF HEARTS.

Alice was rather doubtful whether she ought not to lie down on her face
like the three gardeners, but she could not remember ever having heard
of such a rule at processions; "and besides, what would be the use of a
procession," thought she, "if people had to lie down upon their faces,
so that they couldn't see it?" So she stood still where she was, and
waited.

When the procession came opposite to Alice, they all stopped and looked
at her, and the Queen said severely, "Who is this?" She said it to the
Knave of Hearts, who only bowed and smiled in reply.

"Idiot!" said the Queen, tossing her head impatiently; and turning to
Alice, she went on, "What's your name, child?"

"My name is Alice, so please your Majesty," said Alice very politely;
but she added, to herself, "Why, they're only a pack of cards, after
all. I needn't be afraid of them!"

"And who are _these_?" said the Queen, pointing to the three gardeners
who were lying round the rose-tree; for, you see, as they were lying on
their faces, and the pattern on their backs was the same as the rest of
the pack, she could not tell whether they were gardeners, or soldiers,
or courtiers, or three of her own children.

"How should _I_ know?" said Alice, surprised at her own courage. "It's
no business of _mine_."

The Queen turned crimson with fury, and, after glaring at her for a
moment like a wild beast, screamed "Off with her head! Off----"

"Nonsense!" said Alice, very loudly and decidedly, and the Queen was
silent.

The King laid his hand upon her arm, and timidly said "Consider my dear:
she is only a child!"

The Queen turned angrily away from him, and said to the Knave "Turn them
over!"

The Knave did so, very carefully, with one foot.

"Get up!" said the Queen, in a shrill, loud voice, and the three
gardeners instantly jumped up, and began bowing to the King, the Queen,
the royal children, and everybody else.

"Leave off that!" screamed the Queen. "You make me giddy." And then,
turning to the rose-tree, she went on, "What _have_ you been doing
here?"

"May it please your Majesty," said Two, in a very humble tone, going
down on one knee as he spoke, "we were trying----"

[Illustration: _The Queen turned angrily away from him and said to the
Knave, "Turn them over"_]

"_I_ see!" said the Queen, who had meanwhile been examining the roses.
"Off with their heads!" and the procession moved on, three of the
soldiers remaining behind to execute the unfortunate gardeners, who ran
to Alice for protection.

"You shan't be beheaded!" said Alice, and she put them into a large
flower-pot that stood near. The three soldiers wandered about for a
minute or two, looking for them, and then quietly marched off after the
others.

"Are their heads off?" shouted the Queen.

"Their heads are gone, if it please your Majesty!" the soldiers shouted
in reply.

"That's right!" shouted the Queen. "Can you play croquet?"

The soldiers were silent, and looked at Alice, as the question was
evidently meant for her.

"Yes!" shouted Alice.

"Come on, then!" roared the Queen, and Alice joined the procession,
wondering very much what would happen next.

"It's--it's a very fine day!" said a timid voice at her side. She was
walking by the White Rabbit, who was peeping anxiously into her face.

"Very," said Alice: "----where's the Duchess?"

"Hush! Hush!" said the Rabbit in a low hurried tone. He looked anxiously
over his shoulder as he spoke, and then raised himself upon tiptoe, put
his mouth close to her ear, and whispered "She's under sentence of
execution."

"What for?" said Alice.

"Did you say 'What a pity!'?" the Rabbit asked.

"No, I didn't," said Alice: "I don't think it's at all a pity. I said
'What for?'"

"She boxed the Queen's ears--" the Rabbit began. Alice gave a little
scream of laughter. "Oh, hush!" the Rabbit whispered in a frightened
tone. "The Queen will hear you! You see she came rather late, and the
Queen said----"

"Get to your places!" shouted the Queen in a voice of thunder, and
people began running about in all directions, tumbling up against each
other; however, they got settled down in a minute or two, and the game
began. Alice thought she had never seen such a curious croquet-ground in
all her life; it was all ridges and furrows; the balls were live
hedgehogs, the mallets live flamingoes, and the soldiers had to double
themselves up and to stand upon their hands and feet, to make the
arches.

[Illustration]

The chief difficulty Alice found at first was in managing her flamingo;
she succeeded in getting its body tucked away, comfortably enough, under
her arm, with its legs hanging down, but generally, just as she had got
its neck nicely straightened out, and was going to give the hedgehog a
blow with its head, it _would_ twist itself round and look up in her
face, with such a puzzled expression that she could not help bursting
out laughing: and when she had got its head down, and was going to
begin again, it was very provoking to find that the hedgehog had
unrolled itself and was in the act of crawling away: besides all this,
there was generally a ridge or a furrow in the way wherever she wanted
to send the hedgehog to, and, as the doubled-up soldiers were always
getting up and walking off to other parts of the ground, Alice soon came
to the conclusion that it was a very difficult game indeed.

The players all played at once without waiting for turns, quarrelling
all the while, and fighting for the hedgehogs; and in a very short time
the Queen was in a furious passion, and went stamping about, and
shouting "Off with his head!" or "Off with her head!" about once in a
minute.

Alice began to feel very uneasy: to be sure she had not as yet had any
dispute with the Queen, but she knew that it might happen any minute,
"and then," thought she, "what would become of me? They're dreadfully
fond of beheading people here: the great wonder is that there's any one
left alive!"

She was looking about for some way of escape, and wondering whether she
could get away without being seen, when she noticed a curious
appearance in the air: it puzzled her very much at first, but, after
watching it a minute or two, she made it out to be a grin, and she said
to herself "It's the Cheshire Cat: now I shall have somebody to talk
to."

"How are you getting on?" said the Cat, as soon as there was mouth
enough for it to speak with.

Alice waited till the eyes appeared, and then nodded. "It's no use
speaking to it," she thought, "till its ears have come, or at least one
of them." In another minute the whole head appeared, and then Alice put
down her flamingo, and began an account of the game, feeling very glad
she had some one to listen to her. The Cat seemed to think that there
was enough of it now in sight, and no more of it appeared.

"I don't think they play at all fairly," Alice began, in rather a
complaining tone, "and they all quarrel so dreadfully one can't hear
oneself speak--and they don't seem to have any rules in particular; at
least, if there are, nobody attends to them--and you've no idea how
confusing it is all the things being alive; for instance, there's the
arch I've got to go through next walking about at the other end of the
ground--and I should have croqueted the Queen's hedgehog just now, only
it ran away when it saw mine coming!"

[Illustration]

"How do you like the Queen?" said the Cat in a low voice.

"Not at all," said Alice: "she's so extremely----" Just then she noticed
that the Queen was close behind her listening: so she went on,
"----likely to win, that it's hardly worth while finishing the game."

The Queen smiled and passed on.

"Who _are_ you talking to?" said the King, coming up to Alice, and
looking at the Cat's head with great curiosity.

"It's a friend of mine--a Cheshire Cat," said Alice: "allow me to
introduce it."

"I don't like the look of it at all," said the King: "however, it may
kiss my hand if it likes."

"I'd rather not," the Cat remarked.

"Don't be impertinent," said the King, "and don't look at me like that!"
He got behind Alice as he spoke.

"A cat may look at a king," said Alice. "I've read that in some book,
but I don't remember where."

"Well, it must be removed," said the King very decidedly, and he called
to the Queen, who was passing at the moment, "My dear! I wish you would
have this cat removed!"

The Queen had only one way of settling all difficulties, great or small.
"Off with his head!" she said, without even looking round.

"I'll fetch the executioner myself," said the King eagerly, and he
hurried off.

Alice thought she might as well go back and see how the game was going
on, as she heard the Queen's voice in the distance, screaming with
passion. She had already heard her sentence three of the players to be
executed for having missed their turns, and she did not like the look of
things at all, as the game was in such confusion that she never knew
whether it was her turn or not. So she went in search of her hedgehog.

The hedgehog was engaged in a fight with another hedgehog, which seemed
to Alice an excellent opportunity for croqueting one of them with the
other: the only difficulty was, that her flamingo was gone across to the
other side of the garden, where Alice could see it trying in a helpless
sort of way to fly up into one of the trees.

By the time she had caught the flamingo and brought it back, the fight
was over, and both the hedgehogs were out of sight: "but it doesn't
matter much," thought Alice, "as all the arches are gone from this side
of the ground." So she tucked it under her arm, that it might not escape
again, and went back for a little more conversation with her friend.

When she got back to the Cheshire Cat, she was surprised to find quite a
large crowd collected round it: there was a dispute going on between the
executioner, the King, and the Queen, who were all talking at once,
while all the rest were quite silent, and looked very uncomfortable.

The moment Alice appeared, she was appealed to by all three to settle
the question, and they repeated their arguments to her, though, as they
all spoke at once, she found it very hard indeed to make out exactly
what they said.

[Illustration]

The executioner's argument was, that you couldn't cut off a head unless
there was a body to cut it off from: that he had never had to do such a
thing before, and he wasn't going to begin at _his_ time of life.

The King's argument was, that anything that had a head could be
beheaded, and that you weren't to talk nonsense.

The Queen's argument was, that if something wasn't done about it in less
than no time, she'd have everybody executed all round. (It was this last
remark that had made the whole party look so grave and anxious.)

Alice could think of nothing else to say but "It belongs to the Duchess:
you'd better ask _her_ about it."

"She's in prison," the Queen said to the executioner; "fetch her here."
And the executioner went off like an arrow.

The Cat's head began fading away the moment he was gone, and by the time
he had come back with the Duchess, it had entirely disappeared; so the
King and the executioner ran wildly up and down looking for it, while
the rest of the party went back to the game.




CHAPTER IX


[Sidenote: _The Mock Turtle's Story_]

"YOU can't think how glad I am to see you again, you
dear old thing!" said the Duchess, as she tucked her arm affectionately
into Alice's, and they walked off together.

Alice was very glad to find her in such a pleasant temper, and thought
to herself that perhaps it was only the pepper that had made her so
savage when they met in the kitchen.

"When _I'm_ a Duchess," she said to herself (not in a very hopeful tone
though), "I won't have any pepper in my kitchen _at all_. Soup does very
well without--Maybe it's always pepper that makes people hot-tempered,"
she went on, very much pleased at having found out a new kind of rule,
"and vinegar that makes them sour--and camomile that makes them
bitter--and--barley-sugar and such things that make children
sweet-tempered. I only wish people knew _that_: then they wouldn't be
so stingy about it, you know----"

She had quite forgotten the Duchess by this time, and was a little
startled when she heard her voice close to her ear. "You're thinking
about something, my dear, and that makes you forget to talk. I can't
tell you just now what the moral of that is, but I shall remember it in
a bit."

"Perhaps it hasn't one," Alice ventured to remark.

"Tut, tut, child!" said the Duchess. "Every thing's got a moral, if only
you can find it." And she squeezed herself up closer to Alice's side as
she spoke.

Alice did not much like her keeping so close to her: first, because the
Duchess was _very_ ugly; and secondly, because she was exactly the right
height to rest her chin on Alice's shoulder, and it was an uncomfortably
sharp chin. However, she did not like to be rude, so she bore it as well
as she could. "The game's going on rather better now," she said, by way
of keeping up the conversation a little.

"'Tis so," said the Duchess: "and the moral of that is--'Oh, 'tis love,
'tis love, that makes the world go round!'"

"Somebody said," Alice whispered, "that it's done by everybody minding
their own business!"

"Ah, well! It means much the same thing," said the Duchess, digging her
sharp little chin into Alice's shoulder as she added, "and the moral of
_that_ is--'Take care of the sense, and the sounds will take care of
themselves.'"

"How fond she is of finding morals in things!" Alice thought to herself.

"I dare say you're wondering why I don't put my arm round your waist,"
the Duchess said after a pause: "the reason is, that I'm doubtful about
the temper of your flamingo. Shall I try the experiment?"

"He might bite," Alice cautiously replied, not feeling at all anxious to
have the experiment tried.

"Very true," said the Duchess: "flamingoes and mustard both bite. And
the moral of that is--'Birds of a feather flock together.'"

"Only mustard isn't a bird," Alice remarked.

"Right, as usual," said the Duchess: "what a clear way you have of
putting things!"

"It's a mineral, I _think_," said Alice.

"Of course it is," said the Duchess, who seemed ready to agree to
everything that Alice said: "there's a large mustard-mine near here. And
the moral of that is--'The more there is of mine, the less there is of
yours.'"

"Oh, I know!" exclaimed Alice, who had not attended to this last remark.
"It's a vegetable. It doesn't look like one, but it is."

"I quite agree with you," said the Duchess; "and the moral of that
is--'Be what you would seem to be'--or if you'd like it put more
simply--'Never imagine yourself not to be otherwise than what it might
appear to others that what you were or might have been was not otherwise
than what you had been would have appeared to them to be otherwise.'"

"I think I should understand that better," Alice said very politely, "if
I had it written down: but I can't quite follow it as you say it."

"That's nothing to what I could say if I chose," the Duchess replied, in
a pleased tone.

"Pray don't trouble yourself to say it any longer than that," said
Alice.

"Oh, don't talk about trouble!" said the Duchess. "I make you a present
of everything I've said as yet."

"A cheap sort of present!" thought Alice. "I'm glad they don't give
birthday presents like that!" But she did not venture to say it out
loud.

"Thinking again?" the Duchess asked with another dig of her sharp little
chin.

"I've a right to think," said Alice sharply, for she was beginning to
feel a little worried.

"Just about as much right," said the Duchess, "as pigs have to fly; and
the m----"

But here, to Alice's great surprise, the Duchess's voice died away, even
in the middle of her favourite word "moral," and the arm that was linked
into hers began to tremble. Alice looked up, and there stood the Queen
in front of them, with her arms folded, frowning like a thunderstorm.

"A fine day, your Majesty!" the Duchess began in a low, weak voice.

"Now, I give you fair warning," shouted the Queen, stamping on the
ground as she spoke; "either you or your head must be off, and that in
about half no time! Take your choice!"

The Duchess took her choice, and was gone in a moment.

"Let's go on with the game," the Queen said to Alice; and Alice was too
much frightened to say a word, but slowly followed her back to the
croquet-ground.

The other guests had taken advantage of the Queen's absence, and were
resting in the shade: however, the moment they saw her, they hurried
back to the game, the Queen merely remarking that a moment's delay would
cost them their lives.

[Illustration: _The Queen never left off quarrelling with the other
players, and shouting "Off with his head!" or, "Off with her head!"_]

All the time they were playing the Queen never left off quarrelling with
the other players, and shouting "Off with his head!" or "Off with her
head!" Those whom she sentenced were taken into custody by the soldiers,
who of course had to leave off being arches to do this, so that by the
end of half an hour or so there were no arches left, and all the
players, except the King, the Queen, and Alice, were in custody and
under sentence of execution.

Then the Queen left off, quite out of breath, and said to Alice, "Have
you seen the Mock Turtle yet?"

"No," said Alice. "I don't even know what a Mock Turtle is."

"It's the thing Mock Turtle Soup is made from," said the Queen.

"I never saw one, or heard of one," said Alice.

"Come on then," said the Queen, "and he shall tell you his history."

As they walked off together, Alice heard the King say in a low voice, to
the company generally, "You are all pardoned." "Come, _that's_ a good
thing!" she said to herself, for she had felt quite unhappy at the
number of executions the Queen had ordered.

They very soon came upon a Gryphon, lying fast asleep in the sun. (If
you don't know what a Gryphon is, look at the picture.) "Up, lazy
thing!" said the Queen, "and take this young lady to see the Mock
Turtle, and to hear his history. I must go back and see after some
executions I have ordered," and she walked off, leaving Alice alone
with the Gryphon. Alice did not quite like the look of the creature, but
on the whole she thought it would be quite as safe to stay with it as to
go after that savage Queen: so she waited.

The Gryphon sat up and rubbed its eyes: then it watched the Queen till
she was out of sight: then it chuckled. "What fun!" said the Gryphon,
half to itself, half to Alice.

"What _is_ the fun?" said Alice.

"Why, _she_," said the Gryphon. "It's all her fancy, that: they never
executes nobody, you know. Come on!"

"Everybody says 'come on!' here," thought Alice, as she went slowly
after it: "I never was so ordered about in my life, never!"

[Illustration]

They had not gone far before they saw the Mock Turtle in the distance,
sitting sad and lonely on a little ledge of rock, and, as they came
nearer, Alice could hear him sighing as if his heart would break. She
pitied him deeply. "What is his sorrow?" she asked the Gryphon, and the
Gryphon answered, very nearly in the same words as before, "It's all
his fancy, that: he hasn't got no sorrow, you know. Come on!"

So they went up to the Mock Turtle, who looked at them with large eyes
full of tears, but said nothing.

"This here young lady," said the Gryphon, "she wants to know your
history, she do."

"I'll tell it her," said the Mock Turtle in a deep, hollow tone; "sit
down, both of you, and don't speak a word till I've finished."

So they sat down, and nobody spoke for some minutes. Alice thought to
herself, "I don't see how he can _ever_ finish, if he doesn't begin."
But she waited patiently.

"Once," said the Mock Turtle at last, with a deep sigh, "I was a real
Turtle."

These words were followed by a very long silence, broken only by an
occasional exclamation of "Hjckrrh!" from the Gryphon, and the constant
heavy sobbing of the Mock Turtle. Alice was very nearly getting up and
saying "Thank you, sir, for your interesting story," but she could not
help thinking there _must_ be more to come, so she sat still and said
nothing.

"When we were little," the Mock Turtle went on at last, more calmly,
though still sobbing a little now and then, "we went to school in the
sea. The master was an old Turtle--we used to call him Tortoise----"

"Why did you call him Tortoise, if he wasn't one?" Alice asked.

"We called him Tortoise because he taught us," said the Mock Turtle
angrily: "really you are very dull!"

"You ought to be ashamed of yourself for asking such a simple question,"
added the Gryphon; and then they both sat silent and looked at poor
Alice, who felt ready to sink into the earth. At last the Gryphon said
to the Mock Turtle, "Drive on, old fellow. Don't be all day about it!"
and he went on in these words:

"Yes, we went to school in the sea, though you mayn't believe it----"

"I never said I didn't!" interrupted Alice.

"You did," said the Mock Turtle.

"Hold your tongue!" added the Gryphon, before Alice could speak again.
The Mock Turtle went on:--

"We had the best of educations--in fact, we went to school every
day----"

"_I've_ been to a day-school, too," said Alice; "you needn't be so proud
as all that."

"With extras?" asked the Mock Turtle a little anxiously.

"Yes," said Alice, "we learned French and music."

"And washing?" said the Mock Turtle.

"Certainly not!" said Alice indignantly.

"Ah! then yours wasn't a really good school," said the Mock Turtle in a
tone of relief. "Now at _ours_ they had at the end of the bill, 'French,
music, _and washing_--extra.'"

"You couldn't have wanted it much," said Alice; "living at the bottom of
the sea."

"I couldn't afford to learn it," said the Mock Turtle with a sigh. "I
only took the regular course."

"What was that?" inquired Alice.

"Reeling and Writhing, of course, to begin with," the Mock Turtle
replied; "and then the different branches of Arithmetic--Ambition,
Distraction, Uglification, and Derision."

"I never heard of 'Uglification,'" Alice ventured to say. "What is it?"

The Gryphon lifted up both its paws in surprise. "Never heard of
uglifying!" it exclaimed. "You know what to beautify is, I suppose?"

"Yes," said Alice doubtfully: "it means--to--make--anything--prettier."

"Well, then," the Gryphon went on, "if you don't know what to uglify is,
you are a simpleton."

Alice did not feel encouraged to ask any more questions about it, so she
turned to the Mock Turtle and said, "What else had you to learn?"

"Well, there was Mystery," the Mock Turtle replied, counting off the
subjects on his flappers, "--Mystery, ancient and modern, with
Seaography: then Drawling--the Drawling-master was an old conger-eel,
that used to come once a week: _he_ taught us Drawling, Stretching, and
Fainting in Coils."

"What was _that_ like?" said Alice.

"Well, I can't show it you myself," the Mock Turtle said: "I'm too
stiff. And the Gryphon never learnt it."

"Hadn't time," said the Gryphon: "I went to the Classical master,
though. He was an old crab, _he_ was."

"I never went to him," the Mock Turtle said with a sigh: "he taught
Laughing and Grief, they used to say."

"So he did, so he did," said the Gryphon, sighing in his turn; and both
creatures hid their faces in their paws.

"And how many hours a day did you do lessons?" said Alice, in a hurry to
change the subject.

"Ten hours the first day," said the Mock Turtle: "nine the next, and so
on."

"What a curious plan!" exclaimed Alice.

"That's the reason they're called lessons," the Gryphon remarked:
"because they lessen from day to day."

This was quite a new idea to Alice, and she thought over it a little
before she made her next remark. "Then the eleventh day must have been a
holiday."

"Of course it was," said the Mock Turtle.

"And how did you manage on the twelfth?" Alice went on eagerly.

"That's enough about lessons," the Gryphon interrupted in a very decided
tone: "tell her something about the games now."




CHAPTER X


[Sidenote: _The Lobster Quadrille_]

THE Mock Turtle sighed deeply, and drew the back of one
flapper across his eyes. He looked at Alice, and tried to speak, but,
for a minute or two, sobs choked his voice. "Same as if he had a bone in
his throat," said the Gryphon: and it set to work shaking him and
punching him in the back. At last the Mock Turtle recovered his voice,
and, with tears running down his cheeks, went on again:

"You may not have lived much under the sea--" ("I haven't," said Alice)
"and perhaps you were never even introduced to a lobster--" (Alice began
to say "I once tasted----" but checked herself hastily, and said "No,
never") "--so you can have no idea what a delightful thing a Lobster
Quadrille is!"

"No, indeed," said Alice. "What sort of a dance is it?"

"Why," said the Gryphon, "you first form into a line along the
sea-shore----"

"Two lines!" cried the Mock Turtle. "Seals, turtles, and so on; then,
when you've cleared the jelly-fish out of the way----"

"_That_ generally takes some time," interrupted the Gryphon.

"--you advance twice----"

"Each with a lobster as a partner!" cried the Gryphon.

"Of course," the Mock Turtle said: "advance twice, set to partners----"

"--change lobsters, and retire in same order," continued the Gryphon.

"Then, you know," the Mock Turtle went on, "you throw the----"

"The lobsters!" shouted the Gryphon, with a bound into the air.

"--as far out to sea as you can----"

"Swim, after them!" screamed the Gryphon.

"Turn a somersault in the sea!" cried the Mock Turtle, capering wildly
about.

"Change lobsters again!" yelled the Gryphon.

"Back to land again, and--that's all the first figure," said the Mock
Turtle, suddenly dropping his voice; and the two creatures, who had been
jumping about like mad things all this time, sat down again very sadly
and quietly, and looked at Alice.

"It must be a very pretty dance," said Alice, timidly.

"Would you like to see a little of it?" said the Mock Turtle.

"Very much indeed," said Alice.

"Come, let's try the first figure!" said the Mock Turtle to the Gryphon.
"We can do it without lobsters, you know. Which shall sing?"

"Oh, _you_ sing," said the Gryphon. "I've forgotten the words."

So they began solemnly dancing round and round Alice, every now and then
treading on her toes when they passed too close, and waving their
forepaws to mark the time, while the Mock Turtle sang this, very slowly
and sadly:--

  "Will you walk a little faster?" said a whiting to a snail,
  "There's a porpoise close behind us, and he's treading on my tail.
  See how eagerly the lobsters and the turtles all advance!
  They are waiting on the shingle--will you come and join the dance?
    Will you, won't you, will you, won't you, will you join the dance?
    Will you, won't you, will you, won't you, won't you join the dance?

  "You can really have no notion how delightful it will be,
  When they take us up and throw us, with the lobsters, out to sea!"
  But the snail replied: "Too far, too far!" and gave a look askance--
  Said he thanked the whiting kindly, but he would not join the dance.
    Would not, could not, would not, could not, would not join the dance.
    Would not, could not, would not, could not, could not join the dance.

  "What matters it how far we go?" his scaly friend replied;
  "There is another shore, you know, upon the other side.
  The further off from England the nearer is to France--
  Then turn not pale, beloved snail, but come and join the dance.
    Will you, won't you, will you, won't you, will you join the dance?
    Will you, won't you, will you, won't you, won't you join the dance?"

"Thank you, it's a very interesting dance to watch," said Alice, feeling
very glad that it was over at last: "and I do so like that curious song
about the whiting!"

"Oh, as to the whiting," said the Mock Turtle, "they--you've seen them,
of course?"

"Yes," said Alice, "I've often seen them at dinn----" she checked
herself hastily.

"I don't know where Dinn may be," said the Mock Turtle, "but if you've
seen them so often, of course you know what they're like."

"I believe so," Alice replied thoughtfully. "They have their tails in
their mouths--and they're all over crumbs."

"You're wrong about the crumbs," said the Mock Turtle: "crumbs would all
wash off in the sea. But they _have_ their tails in their mouths; and
the reason is--" here the Mock Turtle yawned and shut his eyes. "Tell
her about the reason and all that," he said to the Gryphon.

"The reason is," said the Gryphon, "that they _would_ go with the
lobsters to the dance. So they got thrown out to sea. So they had to
fall a long way. So they got their tails fast in their mouths. So they
couldn't get them out again. That's all."

"Thank you," said Alice. "It's very interesting. I never knew so much
about a whiting before."

"I can tell you more than that, if you like," said the Gryphon. "Do you
know why it's called a whiting?"

"I never thought about it," said Alice. "Why?"

"_It does the boots and shoes_," the Gryphon replied very solemnly.

Alice was thoroughly puzzled. "Does the boots and shoes!" she repeated
in a wondering tone.

"Why, what are _your_ shoes done with?" said the Gryphon. "I mean, what
makes them so shiny?"

Alice looked down at them, and considered a little before she gave her
answer. "They're done with blacking, I believe."

"Boots and shoes under the sea," the Gryphon went on in a deep voice,
"are done with whiting. Now you know."

"And what are they made of?" Alice asked in a tone of great curiosity.

"Soles and eels, of course," the Gryphon replied rather impatiently:
"any shrimp could have told you that."

"If I'd been the whiting," said Alice, whose thoughts were still running
on the song, "I'd have said to the porpoise, 'Keep back, please: we
don't want _you_ with us!'"

"They were obliged to have him with them," the Mock Turtle said: "no
wise fish would go anywhere without a porpoise."

"Wouldn't it really?" said Alice in a tone of great surprise.

"Of course not," said the Mock Turtle: "why, if a fish came to _me_, and
told me he was going a journey, I should say, 'With what porpoise?'"

"Don't you mean 'purpose'?" said Alice.

"I mean what I say," the Mock Turtle replied in an offended tone. And
the Gryphon added, "Come, let's hear some of _your_ adventures."

[Illustration: _The Mock Turtle drew a long breath and said, "That's
very curious"_]

"I could tell you my adventures--beginning from this morning," said
Alice a little timidly: "but it's no use going back to yesterday,
because I was a different person then."

"Explain all that," said the Mock Turtle.

"No, no! The adventures first," said the Gryphon in an impatient tone:
"explanations take such a dreadful time."

So Alice began telling them her adventures from the time when she first
saw the White Rabbit. She was a little nervous about it just at first,
the two creatures got so close to her, one on each side, and opened
their eyes and mouths so _very_ wide, but she gained courage as she went
on. Her listeners were perfectly quiet till she got to the part about
her repeating "_You are old, Father William_," to the Caterpillar, and
the words all coming different, and then the Mock Turtle drew a long
breath, and said, "That's very curious."

"It's all about as curious as it can be," said the Gryphon.

"It all came different!" the Mock Turtle repeated thoughtfully. "I
should like to hear her repeat something now. Tell her to begin." He
looked at the Gryphon as if he thought it had some kind of authority
over Alice.

"Stand up and repeat '_'Tis the voice of the sluggard_,'" said the
Gryphon.

"How the creatures order one about, and make one repeat lessons!"
thought Alice. "I might as well be at school at once." However, she got
up, and began to repeat it, but her head was so full of the Lobster
Quadrille, that she hardly knew what she was saying, and the words came
very queer indeed:--

          "'Tis the voice of the Lobster; I heard him declare,
          'You have baked me too brown, I must sugar my hair.'
          As a duck with its eyelids, so he with his nose
          Trims his belt and his buttons, and turns out his toes.
          When the sands are all dry, he is gay as a lark,
          And will talk in contemptuous tones of the Shark:
          But, when the tide rises and sharks are around,
          His voice has a timid and tremulous sound."

"That's different from what _I_ used to say when I was a child," said
the Gryphon.

"Well, _I_ never heard it before," said the Mock Turtle: "but it sounds
uncommon nonsense."

Alice said nothing; she had sat down with her face in her hands,
wondering if anything would _ever_ happen in a natural way again.

"I should like to have it explained," said the Mock Turtle.

"She ca'n't explain it," hastily said the Gryphon. "Go on with the next
verse."

"But about his toes?" the Mock Turtle persisted. "How _could_ he turn
them out with his nose, you know?"

"It's the first position in dancing," Alice said; but was dreadfully
puzzled by the whole thing, and longed to change the subject.

"Go on with the next verse," the Gryphon repeated: "it begins '_I passed
by his garden_.'"

Alice did not dare to disobey, though she felt sure it would all come
wrong, and she went on in a trembling voice:

          "I passed by his garden, and marked, with one eye,
          How the Owl and the Panther were sharing a pie:
          The Panther took pie-crust, and gravy, and meat,
          While the Owl had the dish as its share of the treat.
          When the pie was all finished, the Owl, as a boon,
          Was kindly permitted to pocket the spoon:
          While the Panther received knife and fork with a growl,
          And concluded the banquet by----"

"What _is_ the use of repeating all that stuff," the Mock Turtle
interrupted, "if you don't explain it as you go on? It's by far the most
confusing thing _I_ ever heard!"

[Illustration]

"Yes, I think you'd better leave off," said the Gryphon: and Alice was
only too glad to do so.

"Shall we try another figure of the Lobster Quadrille?" the Gryphon went
on. "Or would you like the Mock Turtle to sing you another song?"

"Oh, a song, please, if the Mock Turtle would be so kind," Alice
replied, so eagerly that the Gryphon said, in a rather offended tone,
"H'm! No accounting for tastes! Sing her '_Turtle Soup_,' will you, old
fellow?"

The Mock Turtle sighed deeply, and began, in a voice choked with sobs,
to sing this:--

          "Beautiful Soup, so rich and green,
          Waiting in a hot tureen!
          Who for such dainties would not stoop?
          Soup of the evening, beautiful Soup!
          Soup of the evening, beautiful Soup!
              Beau--ootiful Soo--oop!
              Beau--ootiful Soo--oop!
          Soo--oop of the e--e--evening,
              Beautiful, beautiful Soup!

          "Beautiful Soup! Who cares for fish,
          Game, or any other dish?
          Who would not give all else for two
          Pennyworth only of beautiful Soup?
          Pennyworth only of beautiful Soup?
              Beau--ootiful Soo--oop!
              Beau--ootiful Soo--oop!
          Soo--oop of the e--e--evening,
              Beautiful, beauti--FUL SOUP!"

"Chorus again!" cried the Gryphon, and the Mock Turtle had just begun
to repeat it, when a cry of "The trial's beginning!" was heard in the
distance.

"Come on!" cried the Gryphon, and, taking Alice by the hand, it hurried
off, without waiting for the end of the song.

"What trial is it?" Alice panted as she ran; but the Gryphon only
answered "Come on!" and ran the faster, while more and more faintly
came, carried on the breeze that followed them, the melancholy words:--

          "Soo--oop of the e--e--evening,
              Beautiful, beautiful Soup!"




CHAPTER XI


[Sidenote: _Who Stole the Tarts?_]

THE King and Queen of Hearts were seated on their throne
when they arrived, with a great crowd assembled about them--all sorts of
little birds and beasts, as well as the whole pack of cards: the Knave
was standing before them, in chains, with a soldier on each side to
guard him; and near the King was the White Rabbit, with a trumpet in one
hand, and a scroll of parchment in the other. In the very middle of the
court was a table, with a large dish of tarts upon it: they looked so
good, that it made Alice quite hungry to look at them--"I wish they'd
get the trial done," she thought, "and hand round the refreshments!" But
there seemed to be no chance of this, so she began looking about her, to
pass away the time.

Alice had never been in a court of justice before, but she had read
about them in books, and she was quite pleased to find that she knew the
name of nearly everything there. "That's the judge," she said to
herself, "because of his great wig."

The judge, by the way, was the King; and as he wore his crown over the
wig, he did not look at all comfortable, and it was certainly not
becoming.

"And that's the jury-box," thought Alice, "and those twelve creatures,"
(she was obliged to say "creatures," you see, because some of them were
animals, and some were birds,) "I suppose they are the jurors." She said
this last word two or three times over to herself, being rather proud of
it: for she thought, and rightly too, that very few little girls of her
age knew the meaning of it at all. However, "jurymen" would have done
just as well.

The twelve jurors were all writing very busily on slates. "What are they
all doing?" Alice whispered to the Gryphon. "They can't have anything to
put down yet, before the trial's begun."

[Illustration: _Who stole the tarts?_]

"They're putting down their names," the Gryphon whispered in reply,
"for fear they should forget them before the end of the trial."

"Stupid things!" Alice began in a loud, indignant voice, but she stopped
hastily, for the White Rabbit cried out "Silence in the court!" and the
King put on his spectacles and looked anxiously round, to see who was
talking.

Alice could see, as well as if she were looking over their shoulders,
that all the jurors were writing down "stupid things!" on their slates,
and she could even make out that one of them didn't know how to spell
"stupid," and that he had to ask his neighbour to tell him. "A nice
muddle their slates will be in before the trial's over!" thought Alice.

One of the jurors had a pencil that squeaked. This, of course, Alice
could _not_ stand, and she went round the court and got behind him, and
very soon found an opportunity of taking it away. She did it so quickly
that the poor little juror (it was Bill, the Lizard) could not make out
at all what had become of it; so, after hunting all about for it, he
was obliged to write with one finger for the rest of the day; and this
was of very little use, as it left no mark on the slate.

"Herald, read the accusation!" said the King.

On this the White Rabbit blew three blasts on the trumpet, and then
unrolled the parchment scroll, and read as follows:

          "The Queen of Hearts, she made some tarts,
              All on a summer day:
          The Knave of Hearts, he stole those tarts,
              And took them quite away!"

"Consider your verdict," the King said to the jury.

"Not yet, not yet!" the Rabbit hastily interrupted. "There's a great
deal to come before that!"

"Call the first witness," said the King; and the Rabbit blew three
blasts on the trumpet, and called out "First witness!"

The first witness was the Hatter. He came in with a teacup in one hand
and a piece of bread-and-butter in the other. "I beg pardon, your
Majesty," he began, "for bringing these in; but I hadn't quite finished
my tea when I was sent for."

"You ought to have finished," said the King. "When did you begin?"

The Hatter looked at the March Hare, who had followed him into the
court, arm-in-arm with the Dormouse. "Fourteenth of March, I _think_ it
was," he said.

"Fifteenth," said the March Hare.

"Sixteenth," said the Dormouse.

"Write that down," the King said to the jury, and the jury eagerly wrote
down all three dates on their slates, and then added them up, and
reduced the answer to shillings and pence.

"Take off your hat," the King said to the Hatter.

"It isn't mine," said the Hatter.

"_Stolen!_" the King exclaimed, turning to the jury, who instantly made
a memorandum of the fact.

"I keep them to sell," the Hatter added as an explanation: "I've none of
my own. I'm a hatter."

Here the Queen put on her spectacles, and began staring hard at the
Hatter, who turned pale and fidgeted.

"Give your evidence," said the King; "and don't be nervous, or I'll have
you executed on the spot."

This did not seem to encourage the witness at all: he kept shifting from
one foot to the other, looking uneasily at the Queen, and in his
confusion he bit a large piece out of his teacup instead of the
bread-and-butter.

Just at this moment Alice felt a very curious sensation, which puzzled
her a good deal until she made out what it was: she was beginning to
grow larger again, and she thought at first she would get up and leave
the court; but on second thoughts she decided to remain where she was as
long as there was room for her.

"I wish you wouldn't squeeze so," said the Dormouse, who was sitting
next to her. "I can hardly breathe."

"I can't help it," said Alice very meekly: "I'm growing."

"You've no right to grow _here_," said the Dormouse.

"Don't talk nonsense," said Alice more boldly: "you know you're growing
too."

"Yes, but _I_ grow at a reasonable pace," said the Dormouse; "not in
that ridiculous fashion." And he got up very sulkily and crossed over to
the other side of the court.

All this time the Queen had never left off staring at the Hatter, and,
just as the Dormouse crossed the court, she said to one of the officers
of the court, "Bring me the list of the singers in the last concert!" on
which the wretched Hatter trembled so, that he shook off both his shoes.

"Give your evidence," the King repeated angrily, "or I'll have you
executed, whether you're nervous or not."

"I'm a poor man, your Majesty," the Hatter began, in a trembling voice,
"--and I hadn't begun my tea--not above a week or so--and what with the
bread-and-butter getting so thin--and the twinkling of the tea----"

"The twinkling of _what_?" said the King.

"It _began_ with the tea," the Hatter replied.

"Of course twinkling _begins_ with a T!" said the King sharply. "Do you
take me for a dunce? Go on!"

"I'm a poor man," the Hatter went on, "and most things twinkled after
that--only the March Hare said----"

"I didn't!" the March Hare interrupted in a great hurry.

"You did!" said the Hatter.

"I deny it!" said the March Hare.

"He denies it," said the King: "leave out that part."

"Well, at any rate, the Dormouse said----" the Hatter went on, looking
anxiously round to see if he would deny it too: but the Dormouse denied
nothing, being fast asleep.

"After that," continued the Hatter, "I cut some more
bread-and-butter----"

"But what did the Dormouse say?" one of the jury asked.

"That I can't remember," said the Hatter.

"You _must_ remember," remarked the King, "or I'll have you executed."

The miserable Hatter dropped his teacup and bread-and-butter, and went
down on one knee. "I'm a poor man, your Majesty," he began.

"You're a _very_ poor _speaker_," said the King.

Here one of the guinea-pigs cheered, and was immediately suppressed by
the officers of the court. (As that is rather a hard word, I will just
explain to you how it was done. They had a large canvas bag, which tied
up at the mouth with strings: into this they slipped the guinea-pig,
head first, and then sat upon it.)

"I'm glad I've seen that done," thought Alice. "I've so often read in
the newspapers, at the end of trials, 'There was some attempt at
applause, which was immediately suppressed by the officers of the
court,' and I never understood what it meant till now."

"If that's all you know about it, you may stand down," continued the
King.

"I can't go no lower," said the Hatter: "I'm on the floor, as it is."

"Then you may _sit_ down," the King replied.

Here the other guinea-pig cheered, and was suppressed.

"Come, that finishes the guinea-pigs!" thought Alice. "Now we shall get
on better."

"I'd rather finish my tea," said the Hatter, with an anxious look at
the Queen, who was reading the list of singers.

"You may go," said the King; and the Hatter hurriedly left the court,
without even waiting to put his shoes on.

"--and just take his head off outside," the Queen added to one of the
officers; but the Hatter was out of sight before the officer could get
to the door.

"Call the next witness!" said the King.

The next witness was the Duchess's cook. She carried the pepper-box in
her hand, and Alice guessed who it was, even before she got into the
court, by the way the people near the door began sneezing all at once.

"Give your evidence," said the King.

"Sha'n't," said the cook.

The King looked anxiously at the White Rabbit, who said in a low voice,
"Your Majesty must cross-examine _this_ witness."

"Well, if I must, I must," the King said with a melancholy air, and,
after folding his arms and frowning at the cook till his eyes were
nearly out of sight, he said in a deep voice, "What are tarts made of?"

"Pepper, mostly," said the cook.

"Treacle," said a sleepy voice behind her.

"Collar that Dormouse," the Queen shrieked out. "Behead that Dormouse!
Turn that Dormouse out of court! Suppress him! Pinch him! Off with his
whiskers."

For some minutes the whole court was in confusion, getting the Dormouse
turned out, and, by the time they had settled down again, the cook had
disappeared.

[Illustration]

"Never mind!" said the King, with an air of great relief. "Call the next
witness." And he added in an undertone to the Queen, "Really, my dear,
_you_ must cross-examine the next witness. It quite makes my forehead
ache!"

Alice watched the White Rabbit as he fumbled over the list, feeling very
curious to see what the next witness would be like, "--for they haven't
got much evidence _yet_," she said to herself. Imagine her surprise,
when the White Rabbit read out, at the top of his shrill little voice,
the name "Alice!"




CHAPTER XII


[Sidenote: _Alice's Evidence_]

"HERE!" cried Alice, quite forgetting in the flurry of
the moment how large she had grown in the last few minutes, and she
jumped up in such a hurry that she tipped over the jury-box with the
edge of her skirt, upsetting all the jurymen on to the heads of the
crowd below, and there they lay sprawling about, reminding her very much
of a globe of gold-fish she had accidentally upset the week before.

"Oh, I _beg_ your pardon!" she exclaimed in a tone of great dismay, and
began picking them up again as quickly as she could, for the accident of
the gold-fish kept running in her head, and she had a vague sort of idea
that they must be collected at once and put back into the jury-box, or
they would die.

"The trial cannot proceed," said the King in a very grave voice, "until
all the jurymen are back in their proper places--_all_," he repeated
with great emphasis, looking hard at Alice as he said so.

Alice looked at the jury-box, and saw that, in her haste, she had put
the Lizard in head downwards, and the poor little thing was waving its
tail about in a melancholy way, being quite unable to move. She soon got
it out again, and put it right; "not that it signifies much," she said
to herself; "I should think it would be _quite_ as much use in the trial
one way up as the other."

As soon as the jury had a little recovered from the shock of being
upset, and their slates and pencils had been found and handed back to
them, they set to work very diligently to write out a history of the
accident, all except the Lizard, who seemed too much overcome to do
anything but sit with its mouth open, gazing up into the roof of the
court.

"What do you know about this business?" the King said to Alice.

"Nothing," said Alice.

"Nothing _whatever_?" persisted the King.

"Nothing whatever," said Alice.

"That's very important," the King said, turning to the jury. They were
just beginning to write this down on their slates, when the White Rabbit
interrupted: "_Un_important, your Majesty means, of course," he said in
a very respectful tone, but frowning and making faces at him as he
spoke.

"_Un_important, of course, I meant," the King hastily said, and went on
himself in an undertone,"important--unimportant--unimportant--important----"
as if he were trying which word sounded best.

Some of the jury wrote it down "important," and some "unimportant."
Alice could see this, as she was near enough to look over their slates;
"but it doesn't matter a bit," she thought to herself.

At this moment the King, who had been for some time busily writing in
his note-book, called out "Silence!" and read out from his book, "Rule
Forty-two. _All persons more than a mile high to leave the court._"

Everybody looked at Alice.

"_I'm_ not a mile high," said Alice.

"You are," said the King.

"Nearly two miles high," added the Queen.

"Well, I sha'n't go, at any rate," said Alice: "besides, that's not a
regular rule: you invented it just now."

"It's the oldest rule in the book," said the King.

"Then it ought to be Number One," said Alice.

The King turned pale, and shut his note-book hastily. "Consider your
verdict," he said to the jury, in a low trembling voice.

"There's more evidence to come yet, please your Majesty," said the White
Rabbit, jumping up in a great hurry: "this paper has just been picked
up."

"What's in it?" said the Queen.

"I haven't opened it yet," said the White Rabbit, "but it seems to be a
letter, written by the prisoner to--to somebody."

"It must have been that," said the King, "unless it was written to
nobody, which isn't usual, you know."

"Who is it directed to?" said one of the jurymen.

"It isn't directed at all," said the White Rabbit; "in fact, there's
nothing written on the _outside_." He unfolded the paper as he spoke,
and added "It isn't a letter after all: it's a set of verses."

"Are they in the prisoner's handwriting?" asked another of the jurymen.

"No, they're not," said the White Rabbit, "and that's the queerest thing
about it." (The jury all looked puzzled.)

"He must have imitated somebody else's hand," said the King. (The jury
all brightened up again.)

"Please your Majesty," said the Knave, "I didn't write it, and they
can't prove that I did: there's no name signed at the end."

"If you didn't sign it," said the King, "that only makes the matter
worse. You _must_ have meant some mischief, or else you'd have signed
your name like an honest man."

There was a general clapping of hands at this: it was the first really
clever thing the King had said that day.

"That _proves_ his guilt, of course," said the Queen: "so, off with----"

"It doesn't prove anything of the sort!" said Alice. "Why, you don't
even know what they're about!"

"Read them," said the King.

The White Rabbit put on his spectacles. "Where shall I begin, please
your Majesty?" he asked.

"Begin at the beginning," the King said gravely, "and go on till you
come to the end; then stop."

There was dead silence in the court, whilst the White Rabbit read out
these verses:--

          "They told me you had been to her,
             And mentioned me to him:
           She gave me a good character,
             But said I could not swim.

           He sent them word I had not gone,
             (We know it to be true):
           If she should push the matter on,
             What would become of you?

           I gave her one, they gave him two,
             You gave us three or more;
           They all returned from him to you,
             Though they were mine before.

           If I or she should chance to be
             Involved in this affair,
           He trusts to you to set them free,
             Exactly as we were.

           My notion was that you had been
             (Before she had this fit)
           An obstacle that came between
             Him, and ourselves, and it.

           Don't let him know she liked them best,
             For this must ever be
           A secret, kept from all the rest,
             Between yourself and me."

"That's the most important piece of evidence we've heard yet," said the
King, rubbing his hands; "so now let the jury----"

"If any of them can explain it," said Alice, (she had grown so large in
the last few minutes that she wasn't a bit afraid of interrupting him,)
"I'll give him sixpence. _I_ don't believe there's an atom of meaning in
it."

The jury all wrote down on their slates, "_She_ doesn't believe there's
an atom of meaning in it," but none of them attempted to explain the
paper.

"If there's no meaning in it," said the King, "that saves a world of
trouble, you know, as we needn't try to find any. And yet I don't
know," he went on, spreading out the verses on his knee, and looking at
them with one eye; "I seem to see some meaning in them after all.
'----_said I could not swim_--' you can't swim can you?" he added,
turning to the Knave.

The Knave shook his head sadly. "Do I look like it?" he said. (Which he
certainly did _not_, being made entirely of cardboard.)

"All right, so far," said the King, as he went on muttering over the
verses to himself: "'_We know it to be true_--' that's the jury, of
course--'_If she should push the matter on_'--that must be the
Queen--'_What would become of you?_'--What, indeed!--'_I gave her one,
they gave him two_--' why, that must be what he did with the tarts, you
know----"

"But it goes on '_they all returned from him to you_,'" said Alice.

"Why, there they are!" said the King triumphantly, pointing to the tarts
on the table. "Nothing can be clearer than _that_. Then again--'_before
she had this fit_--' you never had _fits_, my dear, I think?" he said to
the Queen.

"Never!" said the Queen furiously, throwing an inkstand at the Lizard
as she spoke. (The unfortunate little Bill had left off writing on his
slate with one finger, as he found it made no mark; but he now hastily
began again, using the ink, that was trickling down his face, as long as
it lasted.)

"Then the words don't _fit_ you," said the King, looking round the court
with a smile. There was a dead silence.

"It's a pun!" the King added in an angry tone, and everybody laughed.

"Let the jury consider their verdict," the King said, for about the
twentieth time that day.

"No, no!" said the Queen. "Sentence first--verdict afterwards."

"Stuff and nonsense!" said Alice loudly. "The idea of having the
sentence first!"

"Hold your tongue!" said the Queen, turning purple.

"I won't!" said Alice.

"Off with her head!" the Queen shouted at the top of her voice. Nobody
moved.

"Who cares for _you_?" said Alice (she had grown to her full size by
this time). "You're nothing but a pack of cards!"

[Illustration: _At this the whole pack rose up into the air, and came
flying down upon her_]

At this the whole pack rose up into the air, and came flying down upon
her: she gave a little scream, half of fright and half of anger, and
tried to beat them off, and found herself lying on the bank, with her
head in the lap of her sister, who was gently brushing away some dead
leaves that had fluttered down from the trees upon her face.

"Wake up, Alice dear!" said her sister. "Why, what a long sleep you've
had!"

"Oh, I've had such a curious dream!" said Alice, and she told her
sister, as well as she could remember them, all these strange Adventures
of hers that you have just been reading about; and when she had
finished, her sister kissed her, and said "It _was_ a curious dream,
dear, certainly: but now run in to your tea; it's getting late." So
Alice got up and ran off, thinking while she ran, as well she might,
what a wonderful dream it had been.




BUT her sister sat still just as she had left her, leaning her head,
watching the setting sun, and thinking of little Alice and all her
wonderful Adventures, till she too began dreaming after a fashion, and
this was her dream:

First, she dreamed of little Alice herself, and once again the tiny
hands were clasped upon her knee, and the bright eager eyes were looking
up into hers--she could hear the very tones of her voice, and see that
queer little toss of her head to keep back the wandering hair that
_would_ always get into her eyes--and still as she listened, or seemed
to listen, the whole place around her became alive with the strange
creatures of her little sister's dream.

The long grass rustled at her feet as the White Rabbit hurried by--the
frightened Mouse splashed his way through the neighbouring pool--she
could hear the rattle of the teacups as the March Hare and his friends
shared their never-ending meal, and the shrill voice of the Queen
ordering off her unfortunate guests to execution--once more the pig-baby
was sneezing on the Duchess' knee, while plates and dishes crashed
around it--once more the shriek of the Gryphon, the squeaking of the
Lizard's slate-pencil, and the choking of the suppressed guinea-pigs,
filled the air, mixed up with the distant sobs of the miserable Mock
Turtle.

So she sat on with closed eyes, and half believed herself in Wonderland,
though she knew she had but to open them again, and all would change to
dull reality--the grass would be only rustling in the wind, and the pool
rippling to the waving of the reeds--the rattling teacups would change
to the tinkling sheep-bells, and the Queen's shrill cries to the voice
of the shepherd boy--and the sneeze of the baby, the shriek of the
Gryphon, and all the other queer noises, would change (she knew) to the
confused clamour of the busy farm-yard--while the lowing of the cattle
in the distance would take the place of the Mock Turtle's heavy sobs.

Lastly, she pictured to herself how this same little sister of hers
would, in the after-time, be herself a grown woman; and how she would
keep, through all her riper years, the simple and loving heart of her
childhood: and how she would gather about her other little children,
and make _their_ eyes bright and eager with many a strange tale, perhaps
even with the dream of Wonderland of long ago: and how she would feel
with all their simple sorrows, and find a pleasure in all their simple
joys, remembering her own child-life, and the happy summer days.


THE END




          ILLUSTRATIONS REPRODUCED BY HENTSCHEL COLOURTYPE
              TEXT PRINTED BY BALLANTYNE & COMPANY LTD
                       AT THE BALLANTYNE PRESS
                           TAVISTOCK STREET
                                 LONDON

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

Page 8, opening quote added to text (doorway; "and even if)

Page 33, "she" changed to "she's" (And she's such a)

Page 37, "quiet" changed to "quite" (I'm quite tired of)

Page 41, colon changed to period (arm, yer honour.)

Page 42, "wont" changed to "want" (want to stay)

Page 66, closing quotation mark added (to-morrow----")

Page 69, single quotation mark changed to double (cat," said the
Duchess)

Page 91, word "to" added to text (minute or two to)

Page 103, word "as" added to the text (just as she had)

Page 104, "hedge-hog" changed to "hedgehog" (send the hedgehog to)

Page 126, end parenthesis added ("No, never")

Page 153, added an apostrophe (What's in it?)






End of Project Gutenberg's Alice's Adventures in Wonderland, by Lewis Carroll

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ALICE'S ADVENTURES IN WONDERLAND ***

***** This file should be named 28885-8.txt or 28885-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/8/8/28885/

Produced by Jana Srna, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by the
University of Florida Digital Collections.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
﻿Project Gutenberg's Erzgebirgische Christ- und Mettenspiele, by Max Wenzel

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Erzgebirgische Christ- und Mettenspiele
       Ein Versuch zur Rettung alten Volksgutes

Author: Max Wenzel

Release Date: March 10, 2019 [EBook #59046]

Language: German

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ERZGEBIRGISCHE CHRIST- UND ***




Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









    Anmerkungen zur Transkription


    Das Original ist in Fraktur gesetzt. Im Original gesperrter Text
    und Regieanweisungen sind _so ausgezeichnet_. Im Original in
    Antiqua gesetzte Passagen sind ~so markiert~. Im Original fett
    gesetzter Text ist =so gekennzeichnet=.

    Weitere Anmerkungen zur Transkription befinden sich am Ende des
    Buches.




    Erzgebirgische
    Christ- und Mettenspiele

    _Ein Versuch
    zur Rettung alten Volksgutes_

    von

    Max Wenzel.

    [Illustration]

    1921.

    H. Thümmlers Verlag in Chemnitz.




    Der

    Chemnitzer Volkshochschule

    und ihrem verdienten Leiter

    Herrn Studienrat Dr. Hans Keller

    in Verehrung gewidmet.

[Illustration]




Vorwort.


Dies Büchlein will nichts, als eine Unzahl Blüten alterzgebirgischer
Volkspoesie, die bisher verstreut oder vergessen waren, zu einem
kunstlosen Strauße binden.

Volkslied und Volksdichtung sind lange nicht mehr kaum geduldete und
mitleidig belächelte Begriffe im deutschen Kunstleben. Das Volkslied
erklingt auf allen Wegen und Stegen, daheim und im Konzertsaal; die
Volksdichtung hat verständnisvolle Leser und das Volksbühnenspiel
durch Haaß-Berkow begeisterte Hörer und Miterleber gefunden. Die
sentimental-süßliche für das Volk zurechtgestutzte Volkskunst ist
als falsches Gold erkannt und entwertet worden und mit gediegener
Eigenprägung wartet die künstlerische Münze unseres Volkes auf.

Durch alle Gegenden des deutschen Landes braust ein voller Chor zum
Preise unseres unverfälschten Volkstums, möge das Stimmlein dieses
Buches ihn verstärken helfen!

       *       *       *       *       *

»Es begab sich aber zu der Zeit, daß ein Gebot vom Kaiser Augustus
ausging«, so beginnt die lieblichste aller religiösen Erzählungen. Alle
Fragen geschichtlicher Kritik und fordernder Dogmatik schweigen bei
dieser Weihnachtsgeschichte und selbst der dem Christentum Abgekehrte
läßt die heiligen Märlein gern auf sich wirken und feiert selige
Kindheitserinnerungen. Wie ein echtes und rechtes Volkslied mutet
dieser Bericht von der Geburt des Heilandes an. Das traute hochheilige
Paar im dunklen Stalle, wo der Weltenheiland nackt und arm geboren
wird. Aus der Tiefe muß er emporsteigen, der sein Volk zur Höhe
führen will. Und den armen und verachteten Hirten naht der himmlische
Herold und schickt sie zu dem frierenden göttlichen Kinde. Auch der
geheimnisvolle Orient muß vertreten sein, darum erscheinen die drei
Weisen aus dem Morgenlande, sogar ein wirklicher Neger ist dabei, und
stellen ihre reichen Gaben in den Stall. Gegensätze über Gegensätze,
wie sie das Volk liebt.

Darum war es der glücklichste Gedanke der altchristlichen Kirche, die
volkstümlichste Erzählung der heiligen Schriften in den Mittelpunkt
eines Festes zu stellen, das heute noch seinen Zauber auf Gläubige und
Ungläubige ausübt.

Seine ganze Liebe hat das Volk von jeher über dieses Fest ausgegossen.
Die Volkssitte umgab es mit einem bunten Kranze von volkstümlichen
Sitten und Gebräuchen, die es von jedem anderen Feste unterscheiden.
Was an künstlerischer Begeisterung und inbrünstiger Liebe im Volke
schlummert, von dem Rauschen der Engelsfittige ward es aufgeweckt
und auf allen Kunstgebieten entstanden köstliche Werke naivsten
Kunstempfindens. Aus ungefügen Holzklötzen formte sich die Gottesmutter
mit dem Kinde, um den Kirchen ein festlicher Schmuck zu sein. Der
Winkel der Wohnstube bevölkerte sich mit allerlei buntem Schnitzwerk,
das die liebliche Erzählung figürlich darstellte. In süßen Liedern
und innigen Versen ward das hochheilige Paar gepriesen. Und die aus
der Tiefe des Volks schöpfende Kunst fand einen Schacht voll Gold
und Edelsteinen, sodaß sie noch heute der Ausbeute froh wird. Die
darstellenden Künste, Tonkunst und Dichtkunst haben gleichen Anteil
an der Hebung der Schätze. Ja auch die Anfänge der Schauspielkunst
berühren sich mit der volkstümlichen Darstellung der Geburtsgeschichte
des liebenswertesten aller Menschen.

Von altersher hat das Volk an dramatischen Vorführungen seine Freude
gehabt, sowohl als andächtiger Hörer, wie als eifriger Mitspieler.
Die Uranfänge dieser dramatischen Betätigung liegen teils in dem
vorchristlich-heidnischen Mythos der Zwölfnächte, in denen, als in der
Zeit der wiederkehrenden Sonne, die Götter lohnend und strafend Umzüge
halten, teils in den Mysterien der altchristlichen Kirche. Heute noch
ziehen zur Weihnachtszeit, wie in den alten Zeiten, in Norddeutschland
der Schimmelreiter, der Breithut, Wotans wilde Jagd, Berchta und
Holle, mehr nach dem Süden zu in mehr oder weniger christlicher
Aufmachung der Pelzmärtel, der Knecht Ruprecht, St. Niklas und andere
Göttergestalten umher. Die Kirche, die sich mit ausgezeichnetem
Geschick dem alten Volksglauben anzupassen verstand, legte schon
das Fest der Geburt des Heilandes in die mit mystischem Geiste
erfüllte Zeit der Wintersonnenwende. Die alten Götter mußten sich
eine Umtaufe in Gestalten der christlichen Legende gefallen lassen.
Götter und Bräuche der Julzeit wurden leicht mit den ansprechenden
Verhältnissen und Personen des Weihnachtsevangeliums verquickt. So kam
christlich-religiöses in den germanischen Gotteskult, aber umgedreht
drang auch liebes Altgewohntes und Schwerzuvergessendes in den
christlichen Volksglauben ein.

Die Kirche war bestrebt, dem neuen Feste einen mystischen Zauber zu
verleihen, wußte sie doch, daß sie damit die schlichten Naturmenschen
unwiderstehlich in ihren Bann zog. Daher wirkte sie durch prächtige
Gewänder, Weihrauch, Lichter, durch süße schmeichelnde Gesänge auf
die Hörer ein, ja sie verschmähte auch die dramatische Darstellung
des Weihnachtsmysteriums in ihren Gotteshäusern nicht. Dies dürften
auch die Anfänge der deutschen Schauspielkunst sein. Aber wie das
griechische Drama aus dem Geiste der Musik entstanden ist, so wurden
auch die ältesten Weihnachtsspiele gesungen und zwar lateinisch. Dies
schloß zunächst eine Mitwirkung der Laien an den Spielen vollständig
aus. Die Kirche mochte wohl erkennen, welche tiefe Wirkung sie mit
diesen Darstellungen auf ihre Gläubigen ausübte und war bemüht, diese
Wirkung noch zu vertiefen, dadurch, daß sie die Spiele volkstümlich
gestaltete. Nach und nach trat ein Laie nach dem andern in die
Darsteller ein. Mehr und mehr erklangen deutsche Laute, ja endlich
blieben nur die eigentlichen überirdischen Aussprachen, wie das
~Gloria~ der Engel, das ~Ave Maria~ lateinisch bestehen. Mit dem
Eindringen des Volkes in diese geistlichen Spielergesellschaften
traten gewisse Elemente in die Dichtungen selbst, die wohl zunächst
von der Kirche nicht beabsichtigt waren, dann stillschweigend geduldet
wurden, bis sie endlich eine Gefahr für die ganze Weihe des Ortes und
der Handlung bildete. Das Volk drückte seine Gefühle des Wohlwollens
mit einzelnen Personen und Verhältnissen anders aus, wie die gelehrte
Geistlichkeit es wünschte.

Die in alten Zeiten herrschende Derbheit, ja Rohheit ließ die Spiele
nicht unberührt, allerhand Allzuweltliches mischte sich hinein, es
entstanden Unzuträglichkeiten, die schließlich den Geistlichen die
Teilnahme an den Spielen verboten und diese aus den Gotteshäusern
verwies. Die Spiele waren für die große Masse des Volks berechnet
und dieses wollte sein Vergnügen haben, darum mengte es Heiliges und
Possenhaftes seelenruhig durcheinander. Man ist ehrlich überrascht,
wenn man sich in dieses alte Volksgut versenkt. Wunderliche, bunte
Klänge umgeben uns, guter echter Volksliederton. Wie nüchtern
und einsam kommen uns die paar Weihnachtslieder vor, die unseren
Christfeiern geblieben sind.

Ebenso stark ist aber auch eine gewisse Befremdung über den
unerhört freien und kecken Ton, in dem hier die heiligen Gestalten
und Ereignisse behandelt werden. Die allzu große Intimität und
Heimatlichkeit möchte uns fast zweifeln lassen, ob nicht etwa hier
schon gespottet wird. Die ganze heilige Geschichte ist eine heimische
Angelegenheit geworden. Draußen auf dem Feld am Bergwald hat sich alles
zugetragen. Zwischen die Veitel und Stöffel, Matz und Jaköbl platzt
auf einmal so ein unerhörtes Geschehnis, wie das Erscheinen eines
Engels, hinein. Doch man betrachtet die Sache mit gutem Humor. Es geht
so gemütlich zu, daß man das »Fürchtet euch nicht!« des Engels recht
unnötig findet. Der Joseph ist ein alter Mann, schon so zittrig, daß
er den Brei des Christkindleins verschüttet, er geht ganz krumm und
hustet fortgesetzt. Man muß es recht deutlich merken, daß er viel zu
alt ist, um der natürliche Vater des Kindleins sein zu können. Und
der König Herodes ist doch ein recht dummer Teufel, der sich von den
drei Weisen und dem Engel Gabriel nasführen lassen muß. Ueberhaupt,
was an biblischen oder dogmatischen Tönen erklingt, mutet fast etwas
fremd an. Es klingt, als wenn in das lustige Geplapper der Kinder
eingelernte Bibelsprüche und Liederverse aus dem Gesangbuch gemischt
werden. Mir erscheint die volkstümliche Behandlung der biblischen
Erzählung geradezu charakteristisch für den deutschen Volkshumor.
Dieser verbindet gern einen kleinen Scherz, ja sogar einen gutmütigen
Spott mit den Gefühlen der Achtung und Ehrfurcht. Ist es bei Gottfried
Keller, Wilhelm Raabe und Fritz Reuter nicht ebenso? Auf dem Gebiete
der Religion haben wir diesen Humor durch die zeitweilige Einwirkung
einer erkältenden Orthodoxie etwas verloren. Gerade dieser Humor ist ja
alles andere wie eine Verhöhnung. Nur mit Personen, die seinem Herzen
nahe stehen, die es mit Liebe und Wohlwollen betrachtet, erlaubt sich
das Volk solch köstlichen Spott.

Die Freude an solchen Spielen war in Deutschland allgemein. Besonders
in Schlesien und Süddeutschland waren sie zu Haus. Von hier brachten
sie zuziehende Bergleute, die das Gerücht von dem fabelhaften
Silberreichtum des _Erzgebirges_ von ihrer Heimat weglockte, in unsere
Berge. Nicht gedruckt oder handschriftlich wurden sie mitgebracht.
Einer oder der andere hatte zu Haus schon den Joseph, den Wirt oder
einen Hirten gespielt. Seine Rolle kannte er genau, die anderen
waren ihm zum Teil auch geläufig. Was noch fehlte, konnten andere
ergänzen, die ebenfalls zu Haus an solchem Tun teilgenommen hatten. Im
Notfall wurde auch ein Verslein hinzugedichtet. So sind jedenfalls die
_erzgebirgischen Weihnachtsspiele_ entstanden.

Es erscheint unzweifelhaft, daß sie hauptsächlich aus Schlesien zu uns
gekommen sind. In dem grundlegenden Werke »Weihnachts-Spiele und Lieder
aus Süddeutschland und Schlesien« von Dr. Karl Weinhold (ordentl.
Professor an der Universität Kiel, neue Ausgabe 1875 bei Braumüller in
Wien erschienen) treten einige schlesische Spiele auf, die man ohne
Zweifel als die Urformen der erzgebirgischen Spiele ansehen kann. Man
vergleiche das nachfolgende _Christkindlied_ aus Niederschlesien mit
dem Beginn der später in diesem Hefte angeführten _Wiesaer_ Engelschar.

Der Engel tritt ein, weißgekleidet, in der Hand ein Schwert und singt:

    Vom Himmel hoch da komm ich her,
    ich bring euch neue gute Mär,
    der guten Mär bring ich so viel,
    davon ich sing und sagen will.

Das Christkind tritt ein, bunt gekleidet, in der Hand eine Rute und
singt:

    Ein schön guten Abend geb euch Gott,
    ich komm herein ohn allen Spott.
    Hat es auch fromme Kinder innen,
    die fleißig beten und singen künnen,
    die fleißig in die Schule gehn
    und züchtig vor dem Tische stehn.
    Wenn sie fleißig beten und singen,
    so werd ich eine große Bürde bringen.

_Engel._

    Ei, liebes Christkind, wenn ich dir soll die rechte Wahrheit sagen,
    so muß ich über die kleinen Kinder klagen,
    des Morgens wenn sie aufstehn,
    kein Gebet aus ihrem Munde geht,
    Die Bücher tun sie zerreißen,
    die Blätter in die Winkel schmeißen.

_Christkind._

    Ei lieber Engel, hätt ich das eher vernommen,
    in das Haus wär ich nicht gekommen;
    da hätt ich mir meine Gaben erspart
    und wär wieder gen Himmel gefahrn.

_Engel._

    Ei liebes Christkind, bis nicht to hart
    gegen die kleinen Kinder zart!
    sie wollen fromm sein und beten,
    daß du kannst mit deine Gaben vor sie treten.

_Christkind._

    Ach lieber Engel, weil du der Kinder tust gedenken,
    so will ich ihnen etwas geben und schenken,
    damit sie an das heilge Christkind gedenken.

Das _Christkind_ teilt seine Gaben aus, unterdessen singt der _Engel_:

    Ach liebes Christkind, wenn ich wär wie du,
    so hieb ich mit der Rute zu.

_Der Engel_ und _das Christkind_ bleiben vor einander stehen und singen:

    Wir stehen auf einem Lilienblatt
    wir wünschen euch allen eine gute Nacht,
    ein schöne gute Nacht, ein fröhliche Zeit,
    die uns Herr Christus vom Himmel bereit.

_Im Herausgehen_:

    Gute Nacht, gute Nacht, gute Nacht,
    wir haben uns noch weiter bedacht;
    wir haben draußen stehen ein schönen Wagen,
    Der ist mit lauter Gold und Silber beschlagen.

       *       *       *       *       *

An einigen herausgegriffenen Beispielen sollen weiter gewisse
Uebereinstimmungen zwischen den schlesischen und erzgebirgischen
Spielen festgestellt werden. Dabei wurde in den meisten Fällen
die Rechtschreibung des Originals beibehalten, auch gewisse
Verballhornungen lateinischer Sentenzen blieben bestehen, z. B. das
typische »~Landevere~« für ~laudavere~.


Niederschlesisches Spiel.[1]

    Einen schön guten Abend geb euch Gott
    ich komm herein ohn allen Spott.


Reichenbacher Dreikönigsspiel.

    Wir treten herein ohn allen Spott,
    einen schön guten Abend den geb euch Gott,
    einen schön guten Abend, ein fröhliche Zeit,
    die uns Herr Christus hat bereit.


Reichenbacher Dreikönigsspiel.[2]

_Laban_:

    Jetzt tret ich wieder herein ins Haus,
    meine Sachen hab ich gerichtet aus.
    Viel tausend Mann hab ich erschlagen,
    trotz dem, der mir ein Wort kann sagen!
    Die Kinder schrien zwar jämmerlich,
    bei mir war kein Erbarmen nich.


Ernstthaler Spiel.[3]

    Wir treten herein ohn allen Spott,
    einen schönen guten Abend, den geb euch Gott,
    einen schönen guten Abend, eine fröhliche Zeit,
    die Sie und Ihre Kinder erfreut.


Thalheimer Spiel.[4]

_Kriegsknecht_:

    Viel tausend Mann hab ich erschlagen,
    trotz dem, der mir ein Wort kann sagen,
    die kleinen Kinder schrien erbärmlich
    bei mir war aber ganz und gar kein Verschonen nich.


Löwenheiner Spiel.[5]

    Von Bethlehem komm ich zu Haus
    und hab mein Sach gerichtet aus:
    Viele tausend Mann hab ich erschlagen,
    trotz dem, der mir ein Wort kann sagen.
    Die Kinder schrien jämmerich,
    bei mir war kein Verschonen nich.

Im _Schlaupitzer Spiel_ (Weinhold Seite 106) spricht _Joseph_:

    Gotts Pudrament, Gotts Schwefel und Pech.

Im _Wiesaer Spiel_ bricht der große Ruprecht los:

    Hopp, hopp, Gotts Perlemann, Gotts Schwefel und Pech.

Fast übereinstimmend schließen unsere _erzgebirgischen Spiele_ mit dem
Gesang der Liedstrophe:

    Heut schleußt er wieder auf die Tür
    zu seinem Paradeis,
    der Cherub steht nicht mehr dafür,
    dem Herrn sei Lob und Preis.

Dieses Lied führt _Weinhold_ (Seite 124 Anmerkung) in einer ganz
köstlichen Verballhornung an:

    Jetzt schleicht er wieder aus der Tür
    der fromme Paradeis.
    (fehlt)
    Gott sei Lob und Preis.

Daß aber auch süddeutsche Klänge, wie halbverloren, in unsere Spiele
hineintönen, zeigt die Uebereinstimmung des Anfangs des Ernstthaler
Spiels mit dem eines Paradeisspiels, das Weinhold (Seite 302) aus
Vordernberg in Obersteier mitteilt. Dort heißt es:

    Ich trat herein ganz abends spat
    ein glückselgen Abend geb euch Gott,
    ein glückselgen Abend, ein fröhliche Zeit,
    gleich wie uns Gott vom Himmel zeit.

Naturgemäß waren auch die zugewanderten Bergleute die ersten Regisseure
und Darsteller der Spiele. Man darf wohl annehmen, daß zunächst die
religiöse Begeisterung die Triebfeder des ganzen Tuns gewesen ist.
Dies spricht dafür, daß zunächst das Gotteshaus als Schauplatz der
Aufführungen in Frage kam. Diese im Gotteshause aufgeführten Spiele
sind die _Christmetten_, Ueberbleibsel jener alten geistlichen
Mysterien. Die Christmetten waren in ganz Sachsen verbreitet.

Sie wurden in den Kirchen mit aller Pracht gefeiert. Die heilige
Erzählung wandelte man, in ihren einzelnen Abschnitten, dramatisch
um. Anfangs waren nur die Geistlichen die Darsteller, später gingen
die Rollen nach und nach in den Besitz von Leuten aus dem Volke
über. Die schon angedeuteten Uebelstände führten endlich dazu, sie
durch Reskripte der Landesregierung aus der Kirche zu verbannen. Die
bei den Landtagen im Jahre 1805 und 1811 von den Landständen »~in
Consistorialibus~ angebrachten Anliegen und Beschwerden« betreffen
auch die »sogen. Christmetten.« 1805 beantragten Ritterschaft und
Städte, »die Christmetten wegen des dabei gewöhnlichen Unfugs durch
ein Landesgesetz abzustellen.« Der König[6] war zunächst nicht
für eine völlige Beseitigung der alten Sitte, er ordnete nur an,
daß bei fernerer Beibehaltung der Metten allem Unfug auf wirksame
Weise gesteuert werden möchte. Es wurden nun Berichte von den
Superindenturen des Landes eingezogen, um über die Art und Weise der
Kirchenspiele Klarheit zu erhalten. Nach den gewonnenen Unterlagen
konnte das Konsistorium zu Leipzig am 27. November 1811 an den König
berichten, »daß die Christmetten weniger als eine religiöse Feier und
Vorbereitung auf das Weihnachtsfest anzusehen seien, vielmehr als eine
Art Volksbelustigung, weshalb die Christmetten ohne allen Nachteil
abgeschafft werden können.«

Der König entschied jedoch mittels Reskriptes vom 21. August 1812,
»daß an denjenigen Orten, wo Christmetten seither stattgefunden
haben, selbige auch noch fernerhin beibehalten werden mögen, hingegen
an denjenigen Orten, wo sie abgeschafft worden sind, es bei deren
Abstellung bewenden solle.«[7]

Trotzdem ließen sich die althergebrachten Feiern nicht aus den Kirchen
verdrängen. Viele Gemeinden hielten zäh daran fest. Dies gab u. a.
Veranlassung zu einem heftigen Artikel eines anonymen Verfassers, im
»Gemeinnützigen Erzgebirgischen Anzeiger für alle Stände« (3. Stück,
Schneeberg, den 14. Januar 1815, Seite 15).

Nachdem erst die weise Verordnung des »Kirchenrathes«, die
Christmettenfeier betreffend, gepriesen worden ist, heißt es weiter:
»Man hätte nun glauben sollen, daß der zeitherige Mettenunfug die
Farcen mit den als Engel und Hirten verkleideten Kindern wie durch
einen Zauberschlag vernichtet sein würden. Aber nein! Dieser Unfug
dauert in vielen Ortschaften des Erzgebirges und Vogtlandes noch
immer fort. Engel im weißen bebänderten Gewande, mit Sonnen und Welten
tragenden Kronen, das flammende Schwert in der Rechten haltend und
Hirten mit Tasche und Stab machen ihre mystischen Herumzüge in der
Kirche, singen von der Kanzel und Altar ihre Lieder, leiern ihre
Weihnachtssprüche ab und machen ihre englischen Tänze um den Altar
herum. Bald erblickt man sie auf der obersten Emporkirche bald an den
Stufen des Altars. Auch sogar ein Wiegenlied wird gesungen. Die dem
Volke so gefälligen Schulmeister halten die Kirchenuhren zurück, damit
die Feier durch die Finsternis der Nacht begünstigt wird. Alles dieses
und die volle Erleuchtung der Kirche verbreitet einen so mystischen und
magischen Zauber, daß das tollsinnliche Volk ganz entzückt ist. Zwei
Stunden läuft es in der Nacht, um nur die lieben Engelchen zu sehen
und zu hören. Man trägt die Säuglinge auf den Armen in die Kirche.
Jede Familie kommt mit ihren Kinderchen gezogen. Auf die Predigt hört
niemand. Das Getöse der großen Volksmenge, das durch das Aufschreien
der vielen Kinderchen noch vermehrt wird, läßt auch nichts davon
vernehmen. So saugen schon kleine Kinder durch die Anschauung die
grobkörperlichsten Vorstellungen vom Geisterreiche ein, die bei dem
gemeinen Manne das ganze Leben hindurch nicht wieder zu vertilgen sind.«

Der Verfasser war wohl in den Reihen der Geistlichen zu suchen, die
in dem ganzen Treiben eine Konkurrenz des Predigtgottesdienstes
erblickten. Auch dem obersten Kirchenrat zu Dresden war eine anonyme
Zuschrift zugegangen. Dies veranlaßte einen neuen Befehl am 25.
Januar 1815 an die Superintendenturen zu Zwickau, Annaberg, Plauen
und Oelsnitz, Erkundigungen einzuziehen, welche Bewandtnis es mit der
Darstellung der Engel und Hirten überhaupt habe und inwiefern die
Geistlichen und Schullehrer beteiligt seien. Die nun erfolgten Berichte
sind nicht uninteressant. In Grünhain und Breitenbrunn waren zwar die
Schulmädchen mit weißen Kleidern und Kränzen auf dem Kopfe erschienen;
jede andere Verkleidung war unterblieben, weshalb die Pfarrherrn
keinerlei Grund gehabt hätten, die Feier zu verbieten.

Das Programm der Metten in Bernsbach war allerdings reichhaltiger.
Die Gemeinde hatte zum Eingang das Lied »Vom Himmel hoch« gesungen.
Dann kam eine Kirchenmusik, nach der das sogenannte ~Quem pastores
landavere~ von den Schulknaben gesungen worden war. Dann hatte ein
Knabe unter Orgelbegleitung die Weissagung des Jesaias von der Kanzel
gesungen. Dieser Knabe war weiß gekleidet und trug eine Krone auf dem
Kopf. Hierauf hatte der Ortspfarrer gepredigt. Zum Schluß versammelten
sich die Knaben in den Sonntagsanzügen und die Mädchen in weißen
Kleidern auf dem Altarplatz, hier haben sie Reden, Gespräche und
Gesänge gehalten, die die heilge Geburtsgeschichte zum Inhalt hatten.
Pfarrer, Schulchor und Gerichte versehen ausdrücklich, daß der ganze
Gottesdienst nichts Unziemliches enthalten habe. Prachtvoller wurden
die Christmetten in Beyerfeld gefeiert.

    1. Ein Weihnachtslied mit Pauken und Trompeten[8].

    2. Das ~Quem pastores landavere~ mit abwechselnden Chören von den
      Kindern allein gesungen mit Begleitung blasender Instrumente.

    3. Die Weissagung des Jesaias unter musikalischer Begleitung durch
      einen Knaben von der Kanzel gesungen.

    4. Weihnachtslied 5. Predigt. 6. Musik. 7. Die Unterhaltung der
      Kinder am Altar oder der sogenannte Auftritt, d. i. Gespräche
      der Kinder mit Gesängen über die Geburt Jesu nach Anleitung der
      heiligen Schrift.

    8. Dankgebet, von 4 Knaben kniend nach der Reihe verrichtet. 9.
      Kollekte, Szene und Schlußgesang.

Allegorische Verkleidungen der Kinder hatten stattgefunden, die Knaben
bemittelter Eltern haben grüne oder blaue Jacken, weiße Beinkleider,
Schuhe und Strümpfe und grüne Hüte oder Kappen auf dem Kopfe und
Stäbe in den Händen gehabt, die Mädchen aber sind weiß gekleidet
gewesen, mit grünen Kränzen auf dem Kopfe und Stäben in den Händen.
Der Knabe, der die Weissagung gesungen, hat, hergebrachter Gewohnheit
nach, ein weißes Gewand mit einem Bande gebunden und eine Krone oder
Kranz auf dem Kopf gehabt, aber dieses Gewand auch sogleich nach
Beendigung seines Gesanges abgelegt. Vor dem Altar ist dann noch ein
sogenanntes Theater, eine kleine Erhöhung mit Schranken von Stangen,
errichtet worden, weil der Platz zu eng sei und damit die Kinder vor
jedem Gedränge in Sicherheit wären und das Volk die Kinder besser
sehen könnten. Zu ihrer Entschuldigung bringen der Pfarrer August
Friedrich Blüher und der Schulmeister Christian Gottlob Tag vor, daß
keinerlei Ungebührnis oder Unordnung vorgefallen sey, daß die Feier
der Christmetten in diesem Orte seit den ältesten Zeiten stattgefunden
habe, daß zwar der höchste Befehl vom 21. August 1812 anstößigen und zu
Spöttereien Veranlassung gebende Ceremonien untersage, die vorerwähnte
Feier aber ihnen nicht anstößig erschien, auch niemals Anstoß erregt,
sondern zur Erbauung gedient hätte und daß es bei der Gemeinde großen
Verdruß erregt hätte, wäre die Feier unterblieben. Der Kirchenpatron
Freiherr v. Müller auf Sachsenfeld und die Gerichte zu Sachsenfeld,
Beyerfeld und Wildenau bestätigen dies durchaus. -- Der Pfarrer zu
Lauter glaubt auch, daß er bei der Beibehaltung jener Ceremonien nichts
getan habe, was der erwähnten Verordnung entgegen sei. In Oberschlema
war der Pfarrer gerade neu ins Amt gekommen und hatte, um nicht gleich
den Haß der ganzen Gemeinde auf sich zu lenken, die Ceremonien geduldet.

Der Zwickauer Superintendent fügt seinem Berichte noch hinzu: »Ich muß
selbst bezeugen, daß die Gemeinen an den Ceremonien des Engels in den
Christmetten noch sehr hängen und die Pastores, die eine Aenderung
machen wollen, bei mir hart anklagen.«

Auf Grund dieses Berichtes ergeht am 16. Juni 1815 an den Zwickauer
Superintendenten Lorenz der königliche Befehl:

»Friedrich August usw. Wie es nun bei der unterm 11. August 1812
ergangenen Verordnung, nach welcher die Feier der Christmetten, wo
dergleichen noch gewöhnlich sind, auf eine dem Geiste des Christentums
und dem Zwecke religiöser Erbauung angemessenen Weise eingerichtet und
mit einer Predigt oder Betstunde begangen, Ceremonien und Gebräuche
aber, welche mit der Absicht einer religiösen Feierlichkeit sich nicht
vereinbaren lassen oder zu Gespötte und Aberglauben Veranlassung geben,
dabei schlechterdings nicht gestattet werden sollen, bewendet, also
ergeht hiermit an euch unter Zurücksendung des beigefügten Aktenstückes
Unser gnädigster Befehl, Ihr wollet zukünftig Vorkehrung treffen, daß
die Christmetten, wo sie noch stattfinden, nur in dem vorgeschriebenen
Maße gehalten werden und daher die Geistlichen und Schullehrer
an obengedachten Orten wegen der von ihnen nachgesehenen beiden
Christmetten des vorigen Jahres vorschriftswidrig stattgefundenen
Ceremonien nicht nur rectificieren, sondern auch dieselben anweisen,
daß sie künftig weder den Anfang der Christmetten vor 6 Uhr des Morgens
zulassen, noch den Knaben, den zwar zweckmäßigere Gesänge zu singen
nachgelassen bleibt, eine besonders sich auszeichnende Kleidung oder
Kronen sich zu bedienen, Engel und Hirten vorzustellen und dergleichen
Figuren dabei zu gebrauchen oder wohl gar die Kanzeln zu betreten,
verstatten.«

Die Gemüter der einzelnen Gemeinden beruhigten sich natürlich damit
nicht. Mag. Lorenz, der Zwickauer Superus muß am 11. Dezember 1815
an den König berichten: »die Gemeinden beruhigen sich schwer bei den
Abänderungen, die ihren Metten eine andere Gestalt geben sollen und die
Pastores müssen schon in hohem Ansehen stehen, wenn die Vorstellungen,
die sie dagegen machen, noch gemäßigt und bescheiden sind.«

Eine solche Vorstellung oder Beschwerde war auch von der Gemeinde
Lauter bei dem Superintendenten eingereicht worden. Zwei Deputierte
dieser Gemeinde erschienen auf der Superintendentur und unterstützten
diese Vorstellung noch durch mündlich angebrachte Gründe. Sie waren
nicht einverstanden, daß die Metten nicht früher als 6 Uhr beginnen
sollten. Früher, wenn ihre Kinder aus den Metten kämen und durch die
Feierlichkeit besonders für Jesum Christum gestimmt wären, hätten
sie ihnen ihren heiligen Christ bescheren können, was auf sie einen
recht guten Eindruck gemacht habe. Alles dies müsse nun wegfallen,
sobald keine Zeit zwischen den Metten und dem Hauptgottesdienst übrig
bleibe. Ferner sei ihre Christmettenfeierlichkeit auch keine sogenannte
Komödie, sondern eine erhebende, fromme Gefühle erregende und tiefe
Eindrücke zurücklassende Feier der Geburt Christi.

Darauf kommt bald der kurze Entscheid an den Superintendenten zu
Zwickau, d. d. 15. Dezember 1815:

»Friedrich August usw. Uns ist geziemend vorgetragen worden, in welcher
Weise Carl Friedrich Epperlein und Consorten zu Lauter auf Abänderung
des wegen der Christmetten unter dem 16. Juni d. J. an euch ergangen.
Wir lassen es jedoch bei dem obenerwähnten Reskripte bewenden.«

Nun -- trotz aller Einschränkungen -- die Metten blühen noch heut
in einzelnen Orten. Man lese in Oskar Seyferts »Dorf und Stadt« die
entzückende Schilderung einer solchen Mettenfahrt. Auch Dr. Alfred
Müller hat an einem Mettengottesdienst in Steinbach, Bez. Annaberg,
teilgenommen und schildert seine Eindrücke in einem sehr ansprechenden
Aufsatz »Eine Mettenfahrt« (Glückauf 1900, Seite 2.)

Nach John[9] ist in vielen Orten (Neudorf, Tannenberg, Thum,
Wolkenstein, Bärenstein, Schlettau) das Turmsingen üblich. Auch in
Schneeberg wird schon früh 4 Uhr vom mächtigen Turm der hochgelegenen
Kirche gesungen, wobei die Reihenfolge und Auswahl der Stücke jedes
Jahr ein und dieselbe ist.

    1. Herr wir singen dir zur Ehre (Melodie: Wachet auf, ruft uns).

    2. »Das Ehre«, ein achtstimmiger Chor auf den Text »Ehre sei Gott
      in der Höhe.«

    3. »Das Glückauf!« ein uraltes Bergmannslied von dem Stadtältesten
      Biel komponiert.

    4. Chor: Laut verkündet die Trompete und die Pauke rollt es dir.

    5. Choral: Preiset ihn durch Jubellieder (Str. 2 von »Herr, wir
      singen dir zur Ehre«.)

Schmetternde Trompetenbegleitung verstärkt den feierlichen Eindruck
der Gesänge, die von den Chorknaben und freiwilligen Sängern aus der
Stadt ausgeführt werden. Beim Verlassen des Turmes schrieb man sich in
der Turmwohnung in das dort aufliegende Kantoreibuch ein. Wer 50mal
ununterbrochen am Singen teilgenommen hat, erhält eine Pelzmütze und
eine Laterne. John berichtet, daß in den 90er Jahren dies letztmalig
der Fall war. In anderen Orten singt man einfach einige bekannte
Weihnachtslieder oder Choräle vom Turme. In Zwönitz findet das
Turmblasen nachts 3 Uhr statt, um 4 Uhr singen die Chorjungen und die
Metten nehmen ihren Anfang.

In Geyer wirkt die Stadtkapelle früh 5 Uhr beim Gesang der Choristen
mit.

Neben den Christmetten gab es auch noch _Berg-_ und _Schulmetten_. Nach
John (Aberglaube, Sitte und Brauch im Erzgeb.) haben sich die ehemals
weitverbreiteten Bergmetten nur auf einzelnen Schneeberger Gruben
erhalten. »An einem der Festtage kommen die Bergleute mit Lichtern
in der »Hutstube«, wo sonst vor der Einfahrt die Gebete abgehalten
werden, zusammen und überreichen dem Obersteiger ein Geschenk. Um 23.
Dezember 1907 feierte die Belegschaft (ungefähr 45 Bergleute) des
Zinnbergwerkes »Gewerkschaft Alberthütte« in Ehrenfriedersdorf seit
etwa 25 Jahren wieder zum ersten Male (so lange hatte der Bergbau
geruht) ihre altertümliche Mettenschicht. Von früh 5 Uhr bis zum hellen
Tageslicht erglänzte das auf dem Sauberge stehende Triebgebäude, sowie
die daneben befindliche Werkschmiede in hellem Lichterglanz. Die Feier
dieser Mettenschicht wurde in der Betstube durch Gesang und Gebet
abgehalten.«

Die _Schulmetten_, die z. B. in Buchholz bis in die neueste Zeit
hinein abgehalten wurden, nahmen ungefähr folgenden Verlauf. Die
Klassen versammelten sich in ihren durch lichterstrahlende Christbäume
geschmückten Klassenzimmern. Jedes Kind hatte außerdem ein Lichtlein
mitgebracht, das es auf seinen Bankplatz stellte. Eltern und Verwandte
wohnten der Feier bei. Mit Gebet, Gesang und einer Ansprache des
Lehrers wurde die Zeit ausgefüllt. Oft brachten die größeren Schüler
ein kleines Weihnachtsspiel zur Aufführung. In vielen Orten war es
üblich, bei dieser Gelegenheit dem Lehrer ein Geschenk zu überweisen.
Zuletzt wurde der Christbaumbehang unter die Kinder verteilt. Diese
Schulfeiern sind allerdings auch außerhalb unseres Gebirges gang und
gäbe, selbst in den Großstädten füllt man den Unterricht am letzten
Schultage gern durch eine solche Feier aus.

Die _Schulmetten_ bedeuten bereits eine Verweltlichung der
eigentlichen Metten in der Kirche. Noch einen Schritt weiter gehen
die _Christfahrten_. Diese beruhen auf der altgermanischen Sitte,
wichtige Festzeiten durch Umzüge zu feiern. Besonders sollen, wie schon
Tacitus erwähnt, die für die Fruchtbarkeit der Felder so wichtigen
Götter Wotan und Donar segnend über die Felder gezogen sein. Der alte
Götterglaube ließ sich nicht ausrotten, die missionierende christliche
Kirche war auch klug genug, es auf keinen Zwang ankommen zu lassen, sie
setzte nur an Stelle der Götter ihre Heiligen. St. Andreas, Nikolaus,
Petrus und Martin sollten nun dem Volke seine Götter ersetzen. Da
dies nicht gelingen wollte, verwandelte man die hehren Heidengötter
in Schreckgestalten und hoffte, das Volk dadurch völlig von ihnen
abzuwenden. So ist der wackere Knecht Ruprecht jedenfalls ins Leben
getreten, ja in manchen Gegenden sah man sogar zwei, einen großen und
einen kleinen. Zu diesen Personen kam noch der heilge Christ selbst
hinzu, der aber hier als Mann auftrat, und -- um seinen Hofstaat voll
zu machen -- begleiteten ihn mehrere Engel. Diese Gruppe heiliger
Personen nannte man eine _Christfahrt_.

Das Volk war nicht allenthalben mit der Christianisierung ihres
alten Götterumzugs einverstanden, daher ließ es das Abbild der alten
Gottheiten, den rauhen Knecht Ruprecht allein umherziehen, um die
Kinder zu schrecken und zu lohnen. Der wackere Weihnachtsmann ist
immer eine dem Volke liebe und traute Gestalt gewesen. So ist uns
eine Nachricht erhalten, daß am 6. Dezember 1608, dem Nikolaustag, zu
Chemnitz ein Leinenwebergeselle Georg Heinrich in einem besonderen
»Habitu«, nämlich in einem langen weißen Hemde mit einer Kinderrute
in den Händen wohlmeinend ausging, die Nachbarkinder zu besuchen.
Einige Schuhknechte neckten, schlugen und stießen ihn. Ein Knabe
steckte dem Weihnachtsmann ein Messer zu seiner Verteidigung zu.
Ein Schuhknecht ward verwundet und starb am 3. Tage. Der Täter ward
flüchtig. Durch ein Reskript des Kurfürsten Johann Georg I. vom 14.
September 1615 ward der Uebeltäter aber begnadigt, wahrscheinlich hatte
der Fürst volkstümliches Empfinden, das dem erstochenen Schuhknecht
die Schuld an seiner Ermordung selbst zuschrieb. (Mitteil. des sächs.
Altertumsvereins.)

Die Christspieler zogen in den Häusern umher. Sie führten im Flur
oder in der Stube ihr Spiel vor, ermahnten und beschenkten, bez.
tadelten und bedrohten hauptsächlich die Kinder. So eine Christfahrt
aus dem Jahre 1631 wird von Buchwald in den »Kirchl. Nachrichten aus
Zwickau und Umgegend 1890 Nr. 12« veröffentlicht. Sie befindet sich
handschriftlich in der umfangreichen Zwickauer Ratsbibliothek und ist
von einem gewissen Georg Petzoldt in Lengenfeld aufgezeichnet worden.
Nach seinen Angaben ist das Spiel »Anno 1631, den 24. Dezember das
erstemal agiret worden zu Lengenfeld.«

Das interessante Stück soll hier folgen:


Eine Komödia[10]

welche am heiligen Weihnachtsabend die Lengefelder Jugend aufführt.

_Personen_:

Gabriel. Der Heiland. Nikolaus. Raphael. Uriel. Michael.

_Der Engel Gabriel._

    Fried, Freud und ewig Seligkeit
    sei euch allen von Gott bereit.
    Auch ein glückselig neues Jahr
    geb euch Gott und immerdar!
    Weil heut zu dieser Abendzeit
    die ganze werte Christenheit
    sich freuen tut des heilgen Christ,
    der jetzt gar noch vorhanden ist,
    insonderheit die Kinderlein
    an diesem Abend die frömmsten sein,
    indem sie nach den schönen Gaben
    ein herzliches Verlangen haben,
    so hat mich das Christkindelein
    jetzt selbst zu euch gesandt herein,
    daß ich euch seine Gegenwart
    anzeigen soll zu dieser Fahrt
    und ihm bereite seinen Thron,
    darauf sich setz' der Gottessohn.
    Darum, ihr lieben Kinderlein,
    seid still, merkt auf und lernet fein
    alles, was euch der heilge Christ
    befehlen wird zu dieser Frist.

    Hierauf klopft ein anderer Engel oder auch statt des Engels ein
    Bauer draußen an die Tür und spricht:

    Glück denen, die darinnen sein,
    macht auf, macht auf und laßt uns ein!

    Dann tritt der Heiland ein, dem der Engel Michael vorangeht.

_Der Heiland._

    Eine kurze Zeit verlaufen ist,
    Daß ich, genannt der heilge Christ,
    Mein' treuen Diener in alle Land
    Nicolaum hab ausgesandt,
    Daß er zum Gebet und Frömmigkeit
    Die kindlich Jugend mach bereit.
    Weil aber die Zeit vorhanden ist,
    in welcher beschert der heilge Christ,
    so bin ich selber kommen rein,
    zu sehen ob die Kinderlein
    gelebt han nach mein' Gebot,
    ob sie auch treulich gefürchtet Gott,
    ob sie auch meinen Namen geehrt
    und fleißig Gottes Wort gehört,
    ob sie Vater oder Mutter fein
    gehorcht und gehorsam gewest sein.
    Darum, ihr Eltern, so saget an,
    Wie sich die Kinder gehalten han.

    Beklagen sich die Eltern über ihre Kinder, so spricht der
    Heiland:

    Der Eltern kläglicher Bericht
    Erfreut mich itzund wahrlich nicht.
    Darum ich billig Ursach hab,
    Diesen Kindern durchaus keine Gab zu geben.
    Drum nehmt ihr Diener mein
    die Gaben, so ihr bracht herein.
    Ich weiß noch frömmer Kinderlein,
    Da wolln wir jetzund kehren ein
    und ihnen geben die schönen Gaben,
    die sie gar wohl verdienet haben.

    Beklagen sie sich aber nicht, so hebt Uriel an zu klagen:

    Ja, lieben Eltern, es wäre fein
    wenn eure lieben Kinderlein
    sich so verhielten, wie ihr bericht,
    mein Mund aber ein andres spricht.
    Als ich und der vor wenig Tagen
    vor dieses Haus vorüber zogen,
    War ein groß Geschrei und großer Saus
    von euern Kindern in euerm Haus.
    Sie schrien und blökten so schrecklich,
    daß wir beide entsetzten sich.
    Solchs ich nun nicht verschweigen kann,
    sondern dem heilgen Christ zeigen an.

Darauf der _Heiland_:

    Meines Knechts kläglicher Bericht
    erfreut mich itzund wahrlich nicht
    usw. (wie nebenstehend).

    Nikolaus tritt für die Kinder ein und spricht:

    O frommer Christe, Gottes Sohn,
    der armen Kindlein doch verschon.
    Siehe doch wie ihre Aeugelein
    und Mündlein auf dich gerichtet sein.
    Ach sieh, wie stehen sie so traurig,
    ach sollt es nicht erbarmen dich,
    bist du doch sonst gütig und milde,
    freundlich und rechter Lieb ein Bilde,
    insonderheit den Kindelein
    pflegst du hold und gewogen sein,
    sie sein unverständig und klein,
    wissen noch nicht, was recht mag sein.
    Drum laß dein Zorn bald vergehen
    und bleib allhier bei ihnen stehen.
    Tu anhören die Kinderlein!
    Vielleicht sie frömmer werden sein.

_Der Heiland._

    Nikolaus, du treuer Knecht,
    du erinnerst mich jetzund recht,
    drum geh jetzt hin und stell vor dich
    die Kinderlein fein ordentlich.

_Nikolaus._

    Das der heilge Christ befohln allzeit
    treulich zu tun bin ich bereit.
    Darum, ihr lieben Kinderlein,
    stellt euch hier in die Ordnung fein
    und tut hersagen, was ihr habt
    gelernt nach meinem Mandat.

_Der Heiland._

    Für mich dürft ihr euch fürchten nicht,
    euch guts zu tun bin ich verpflicht.
    Mein Nam' ist Gott, mein Tun ist gut,
    Mein Feind ist der, so Schaden tut.
    Ich hab mit mir viel schöner Gaben
    für Mägdlein und für junge Knaben,
    Welche ich denen tu geben,
    die schön und hübsch können beten.
    Drum kommt, ihr lieben Kinderlein
    Heran zu mir und betet fein!

    Nachdem die Kinder ihre Gebete hergesagt, spricht der Heiland:

    Das gefällt mir aus der Maßen wohl,
    Drum ich euch billig lohnen soll.
    Wohlan, Nikolaus, Diener mein,
    teil aus die Gaben den Kinderlein!

_Nikolaus._

    Es soll geschehen, drum nehmet jetzt
    die Gaben, die der heilge Christ
    jetzt geben tut euch Kinderlein,
    dieweil ihr noch könnt beten fein.

_Der Heiland._

    Ihr Kinderlein, nehmt so vor gut
    und habt damit ein' guten Mut.
    Wenn ihr hinfort werd't frömmer sein,
    so will ich tun den Dienern mein
    befehl'n, daß sie euch viel mehr
    Gaben heut diese Nacht bescher'n.
    Ich will euch auch geben allzeit
    langes Leben und gute Gesundheit.
    Desgleichen all mein Engelein,
    solln euer Hüter und Wächter sein.
    Wohlauf ihr Diener, allzumal
    singt und lobt Gott mit Freudenschall.

    Dann singt man ein Lied und Michael sagt zum Schluß:

    Hiermit von hinnen scheiden wir
    und wünsche, daß mögt erleben ihr
    in Fried und guter Gesundheit
    das künftig Jahr und allezeit.
    Darzu auch denn der Engel Schar
    wünscht ein glückselig neues Jahr.
    Ihr Kinderlein habt ein gute Nacht,
    was ihr gehört, fleißig betracht.
    Der Segen Gottes sei mit euch,
    zuteil werd euch das Himmelreich.
    Guter Fried sei stets in dem Haus
    Allen, die gehen ein und aus!

Derartige Christfahrten waren eigentliche Bescherungsspiele. Es sind
auch im übrigen Sachsen solche Adventsumzüge gang und gäbe gewesen;
so berichtet P. Kruschwitz im 1. Bande der »Bunten Bilder aus dem
Sachsenlande« von dieser Volkssitte aus dem Eigenschen Kreis (zwischen
Herrnhut und Ostritz) und H. v. Opell in Band 5 der Mitteilungen des
Vereins für sächs. Volkskunde von ebensolchen »Christkindern« aus
Niederfriedersdorf b. Neusalza. Der Inhalt deckt sich vollständig
mit den Christfahrten des Erzgebirges, auch lassen einzelne Zeilen
und Reime auf einen gemeinsamen Ursprung schließen. Der Schluß des
letztgenannten Spiels ist ganz köstlich.

Die beiden »Christkinder« sprechen beim Gehen:

    Nun so wünschen wir euch allen eine schöne gute Nacht,
    von Samt und Seide ein Bettchen gemacht,
    von Zucker und Rosinen eine Tür,
    von Pfefferkuchen ein Schlößchen dafür,
    und von Muskaten eine Schwell
    und einen Engel zum Schlafgesell.

Die Rollen sind in den meisten Spielen die gleichen, nur die Namen der
handelnden Personen sind verschieden, z. B. wurde der heilige Martin
hier und da durch St. Petrus mit dem Schlüssel ersetzt. Wie schon
angedeutet, wurden die Spiele durch die Hinzunahme eines oder zweier
Ruprechte recht weltlich, ja oft sogar unflätig. Es wurden nicht nur
die Kinder examiniert, sondern auch die »Großen« aus dem Hause. Daß es
dabei nicht ohne kräftiges Necken und Spotten abging, erscheint, bei
der Neigung der Erzgebirgler zur Satire, als selbstverständlich. Der
heilige Charakter der Spiele war in Gefahr und hielt sich nur dadurch,
daß man ihm Teile der kirchlichen Mettenspiele anhängte. So fügte man
an die Christfahrt zunächst die Hirtenszene an und nannte das Ganze
»Engelschar«. Diese zog am 1. Advent bis zu Hohneujahr in den Häusern
umher. Dann trat die Königsschar in ihre Rechte, die hauptsächlich
die Unterhandlungen der 3 Weisen mit Herodes, die Anbetung und den
Kindermord enthielt. Diese »Königsschar« spielte am Epiphanias bis zur
Fastnacht. Darin liegt vielleicht auch ihre Neigung zu komischen, ja
grotesken Szenen begründet, man hatte einen bequemen Ersatz für die
beliebten Fastnachtsspiele. Auch die »Engelschar« und die »Königsschar«
erweiterten sich. Zur ersteren kam das Herbergsspiel mit dem Wirt und
der Magd hinzu, letzteres vervollständigte sich durch Auftreten des
Todes.

Solange in den Privatwohnungen gespielt wurde, nahm das
Bescherungsspiel einen ziemlichen Raum ein; als man aber begann, die
Spiele in die öffentlichen Säle zu verlegen, beschränkte man die
»Christfahrt« und führte andere Szenen und Personen dafür ein. Man war
dazu gezwungen, da das Ueberbleibsel doch zu dürftig ausgesehen hätte.

Ueber die Art und Weise des Auftretens der Christspiele sind uns
verschiedene Aufzeichnungen erhalten, aus denen man zugleich ersieht,
daß die Spiele durchaus nicht die volle Sympathie der Geistlichen und
sonstigen Obrigkeitspersonen besaßen.

In dem Wild'schen Buche »Interessante Wanderungen durch das sächsische
Obererzgebirge«, 1809 in Freiberg erschienen heißt es darüber:

»Sonst war auch das sogenannte heilige Christspiel gebräuchlich, wo
Bergleute und andere gemeine Leute in schön gereimten Burlesken-Versen
die Geburt Jesu als Lustspiel aufführten und so von Haus zu Haus zogen.
Dabei war immer eine lustige Person, welche allerhand Possen trieb,
z. B. dem König Herodes, welcher frisiert, mit goldenem Zepter und
Reichsapfel auf einem hölzernen Stuhle saß, Schnupftabak unter die Nase
rieb, daß er nießen mußte. Joseph wurde als hektisch vorgestellt und
hatte eine Säge in der Hand, Marie sprach oft im schönsten Kontrebaß;
denn Frauenzimmer waren bei dieser Truppe nicht; die Engel gingen in
langen Hemden, mit vielen Bändern geschmückt und gepudert, und hielten
mit einem seidenen Tuche große Husarensäbel in der Hand; die Hirten
hatten hohe spitzige Hüte von Zuckerpapier auf und knallten entsetzlich
mit den Peitschen, auch bliesen sie auf Nachtwächterhörnern; der Stern
war von Pappe und ölgetränktem Papier an einer Stange aufgesteckt und
konnte gedreht werden; manchmal brannte er, denn inwendig stak ein
brennendes Licht. Das Christkind endlich war nicht himmlischer Abkunft,
es sah erbärmlich aus und ward oft sehr übel behandelt. Uebrigens war
immer ein Knecht Ruprecht dabei, welchen man im Gebirge Rupperich
nennt, mit einer Klingel und einer Ofengabel erschien und mußte die
nachlaufenden Kinder abschrecken. -- Am sogenannten heiligen drei
Königsfeste erschienen dabei gar diese drei Majestäten, wobei eine
schwarz war. Doch seit mehreren Jahren hat dieser Unfug aufgehört,
welcher eigentlich noch ein Ueberbleibsel des in Sachsen ehedem
herrschenden Aberglaubens war.«

Härter noch äußert sich ein ungenannter Gewährsmann, wie man bei
Behandlung des Thalheimer Spiels noch erkennen wird.

Allerhand Unzuträglichkeiten stellten sich ein. So berichtet Mosen
(Seite 21), daß oft in der Stadt »zwei oder drei Engel- oder
Königsscharen zusammenkamen, was bisweilen zu Unordnungen Anlaß
gab.« So kam es endlich zu Verboten der Spiele. Sie verschwanden aus
der Oeffentlichkeit. Im Geheimen lebten sie aber noch lange fort.
Zäh hingen die Erzgebirger an dem alten Brauche, die Lokalchroniken
bestätigen dies. Von Mund zu Mund erbten sich die Reimlein fort.
Schließlich gedachte man ihrer noch als einer alten überlebten Sitte
und alte Leute berichteten leuchtenden Auges von der schönen Zeit, da
sie noch die Engelschar erlebt oder selbst mit dargestellt hatten. So
kam auch mancher volkskundliche Sammler zu solchem Gut und hier und da
stieß man in den Zeitungen auf einen Bericht über ein solches Spiel.
Leider ward in den seltensten Fällen das ganze Spiel aufgezeichnet,
sodaß man wohl eine Menge Bruchstücke, aber wenige vollständige
Spiele besitzt. Der Bruder des bekannten Dichters Julius Mosen, der
Gymnasiallehrer Gustav Mosen in Zwickau hat das große Verdienst, viele
bis zum Jahre 1861 vorhandenen Bruchstücke gesammelt und aufgezeichnet
zu haben. Das schlichte Büchlein, das er im Auftrage des Vereins zur
Verbreitung guter und wohlfeiler Volksschriften herausgab, ist hier und
da noch in Büchereien anzutreffen.

Mosen berichtet von Weihnachtsspielen in folgenden Orten: Gersdorf,
Ernstthal, Zschopau, Annaberg und Umgegend, Frohnau, Wiesa,
Hermannsdorf, Königswalde, Sehma, Cranzahl, Raschau, Markersbach,
Großpöhla, Grünhain, Crottendorf, Aue, Pfannenstiel, Rittersgrün,
Jöhstadt, Cunnersdorf, Geyer, Scheibenberg, Schlettau, Bockau,
Grumbach, Buchholz, Bärenstein, Wildenau, Neudorf. Merkwürdigerweise
sind ihm zwei vollständige Spiele nicht in die Hände gekommen, nämlich
das Thalheimer und das Löwenhainer.

Auffallend ist eine gewisse Aehnlichkeit in den Spielen. Im Grunde
genommen sind es wohl nur 4 oder 5, alle anderen sind durch die
mündliche Weitergabe und durch die Anpassung an dem jeweiligen Ort und
die verschiedene Zeit »zerspielt«.


Das Ernstthaler Spiel.[11]

Bis in die 30er Jahre des 19. Jahrhunderts hinein wurde das Stück
regelmäßig in Ernstthal und jedenfalls auch in Gersdorf aufgeführt.
Bühnendekoration war unnötig. Mosen fand leider nur noch Bruchstücke
vor. Seine Uebereinstimmung mit dem Reichenbacher Spiel (R. in
Schlesien) wurde schon erwähnt. Mosen teilt nur den Anfang mit.

Die Spieler singen in der Hausflur den Vers:

    Hosianna, Davids Sohn, kommt in Zion eingezogen.

Dann geht der Schriftgelehrte ins Zimmer und spricht:

            »Geliebte in dem Herrn!
    Wir treten hier ein ohn allen Spott.
    Einen schönen guten Abend, den geb Euch Gott
    einen schönen guten Abend, eine fröhliche Zeit,
    die Sie und Ihre Kinder erfreut.

    Geliebte in dem Herrn! Wir sind heut hier versammelt, den
    großen Gedächtnistag unseres Erlösers mit unseren Mitchristen
    feierlich zu begehen und denselben, wie sichs bei Christis
    Geburt hat zugetragen, deutlich ans Herz zu legen und vor
    Augen zu stellen. Denn es ist ein Tag, den der Herr gemacht,
    sei Lob in alle Welt gebracht. Das laßt uns freuen und fröhlich
    sein und Gott die Ehre geben. Ja

    Wie groß ist dieser Freudentag,
    daran man sich versammeln mag,
    zu loben unsern Gott allein,
    der jetzt sein Volk läßt fröhlich sein.
    Uns Menschen aber sei bewußt
    die wundersüße Weihnachtslust.
    Wir fangen an mit frischem Mut,
    Euer Jesulein, das höchste Gut!

Dann singen alle Beteiligten den Vers: »Wachet auf, ruft uns die
Stimme!« Nun treten die Schäfer auf. Das Stück trug schon zu Mosens
Zeiten alle Zeichen des Verfalls, zusammengeflickt und verwirrt muß es
gewesen sein, sodaß Mosen auf eine vollständige Wiedergabe verzichtet.

Vollständiger ist das


Zschopauer Spiel[12]

erhalten, von dem Mosen einige Stücke mitteilt. Dieses Weihnachtsstück
führt den Namen »Die Ankunft Jesu«. Es ist von 1861 an des öfteren
aufgeführt worden, nachdem es lange Jahre geruht hatte. Eine einfache
Bühne wurde mit Hilfe von zwei spanischen Wänden hergestellt, über
die der Stern emporgehalten wurde. Der Engel erschien von wirksamen
Kolofoniumblitzen begleitet. Das Stück beginnt mit der Herbergsszene.
Der _Wirt_ weiß nicht, wie er seine Gäste unterbringen soll. Er spricht:

    Ich weiß nicht, wie es werden soll,
    die Stuben sind nun alle voll,
    und kommen dennoch stündlich Leute.
    Der Kaiser schreibt die Schatzung aus,
    und dieses geht von Haus zu Haus!
    ich weiß nicht, wo ich Raum bereite.

_Knecht._

    Herr Wirt, es ist hier noch ein Mann
    mit einem zarten jungen Weibe
    und redet Ihn um Herberg an.

_Wirt._

    Fast weiß ich nicht mehr, wo ich bleibe.
    Geh hin und weist sie diesmal weg,
    ich kann sie heute nicht behalten,

            Der Knecht geht ab.

    und wenn ich übern Stall sie steck,
    da möchten sie vielleicht erkalten.

Der _Knecht_ kommt wieder und spricht:

    Die Leute hören gar nicht auf
    zu bitten, höre doch ihr Flehen.

_Wirt._

    Weis' ich sie auf den Boden nauf,
    das lässet nicht, es will nicht gehen.
    Geh, bring sie beide zu mir her.
    ich muß mit ihnen selber reden.

            Der Knecht geht ab.

    -- Kein Sinnen hilft nun da nicht mehr,
    da kommen sie schon angetreten.

    Joseph und Maria kommen.

_Joseph._

    Herr Wirt, o laß Er sich bewegen,
    und nahm er uns ins Haus herein;
    was könnt Ihnen das für Freude sein,
    wenn wir auf freier Straße lägen?

_Maria._

    Kann Ihn ein armes Weib bewegen,
    so laß er uns nicht wieder gehn,
    und sollten wir in'n Stall uns legen,
    es soll mit Freuden gern geschehn.

_Wirt._

    I nun, so geht in jenen Stall,
    wo sonsten Ochs und Esel stehn.

_Maria._

    O angenehmer Freudenstall!
    Komm, Joseph, komm, wir wollen gehn!

_Joseph._

    Herr Wirt, es soll Ihn nicht gereuen,
    daß er uns beide aufgenommen;
    gewiß, wir wollen ehrlich sein,
    er soll die Zahlung gut bekommen.

Dies ist der Schluß des ersten der fünf Akte. Der zweite enthält die
Hirtenszene, der dritte die Unterredung der Weisen mit dem König
Herodes, im vierten beten die Hirten und die Weisen im Stalle das Kind
an, im fünften gibt Herodes den Befehl zum Kindermord, der Engel mahnt
Joseph zur Flucht und zum Schluß treten noch einmal die drei Weisen und
die drei Schäfer auf.

_Der 1. Schäfer._

    Habt Ihr das Kindlein auch gesehn?

_Der 1. Weise._

    Ich sah es in der Krippe schön.
    Es war so hold, so zart und mild,
    von lauter Sanftmut angefüllt.

_Der 2. Weise._

    Sein Wangen glänzten voller Huld,
    voll Liebe, Sanftmut und Geduld.

_Der 2. Schäfer._

    So wollen wir hinnen scheiden,
    des großen Gottes Ruhm ausbreiten.

Nun wird der Schlußvers gesungen

    Heut schleußt er wieder auf die Tür
    zum schönen Paradeis!
    Der Cherub steht nicht mehr dafür,
    Gott sei Lob, Ehr und Preis.


Die Wiesaer Engelschar.

Diese wurde nach Mosen (Seite 21) auch in Frohnau und Hermannsdorf
aufgeführt. Weihnacht 1857 bemühten sich die Frohnauer das Spiel zur
Aufführung zu bringen, es wurde ihnen indes die Erlaubnis versagt.
Mosen teilt dieses Spiel vollständig mit. In die am Schlusse des
Büchleins erfolgte Zusammenstellung ist aus diesem Spiel fast das ganze
Vorspiel aufgenommen worden, nur wurde ein kleines Stück, das allzusehr
die Bescherungsszene betont, weggelassen. Das Herbergsspiel ist
vollständig dem Wiesaer Spiel entnommen. Nach Beendigung der genannten
Szene fährt das Spiel fort. (Mosen Seite 29.)

_Chor._

    Steht ihr Hirten auf und wachet!
    Seht doch, wie der Himmel lachet,
    seht doch an die schöne Nacht.
    Jeder Tag, der muß entweichen
    und die schöne Nacht sich zeigen,
    weil sie steht in voller Pracht.
    Wir leben ohne Furcht und gehen hin zu sehn
    das große Wunder, das in dieser Nacht geschehn.

Die Hirten gehen während dieses Gesanges in taktmäßigen Schritten im
Zimmer auf und ab und zwar so, daß der eine unten ist, während der
andere oben ist. Jetzt beginnt in derselben Weise fortschreitend, _der
große Hirt_:

    Schau, Bruder ein groß Wunder dar!

Der _kleine Hirt_, der jetzt auf der anderen Seite der Stube ist,
spricht nach:

    »Wunder da!«

Er wiederholt so bei jeder Verszeile die letzten Worte, bei denen sich
beide Hirten allemal umwenden und nach der entgegengesetzten Seite
gehen.

    Die schwarze Nacht scheint hell und klar,
    ein großes Licht bricht jetzt herein,
    ihm weichet aller Sternenschein.

_Der kleine Hirt._

    Schau, Bruder, ein groß Wunderlicht!

    (Der große Hirt wiederholt
    »Wunderlicht«, wie oben.)

    Scheint ja die alte Sonne nicht,
    weils wider die Natur die Nacht
    zu einem hellen Tage erwacht.

_Der große Hirt._

    Was wird hierdurch und zeiget an,
    daß sich die Natur so ändern kann?
    Es muß ein großes Werk geschehn,
    wie wir an diesem Zeichen sehn.

Nun erscheint der Engel und verkündet mit den Worten der heiligen
Schrift die Geburt des Christkindes.

_Der kleine Hirt._

    Drum, Bruder, auf, geh mit mir einen Lauf,
    nach Bethlehem wollen wir gahn
    und wollen nach diesem Kindlein fran,
    wie uns der Engel hat kundgetan.

_Chor._

    ~In dulcio jubilo~,
    nun singet und seid froh,
    unseres Herzens Wonne
    liegt in ~praesepio~
    und leuchtet als die Sonne.

Dann gehen die Hirten zu Maria und Joseph; der _große Hirt_ spricht:

    Ein schönen guten Abend, mein lieber Papa,
    treffen wir das neugeborne Kindlein hier a?

_Joseph._

    Ja, ja, ja, ja!

_Großer Hirt._

    Wie heißt das Kind?

_Joseph._

    Emanuel.

_Großer Hirt._

    Was bringt es mit?

_Joseph._

    Trost, Heil der Seel!

_Großer Hirt._

    Ei, wer führt uns zu dem Kindelein?

_Joseph._

    Das tut der rechte Glaub allein.

_Großer Hirt._

    Ei, warum sollten wir da nicht fröhlich sein
    und singen mit den lieben Engelein:
    Laßt uns alle fröhlich sein?!

_Chor._

    Laßt uns alle fröhlich sein,
    grüßen Gott den Herrn,
    der sein liebes Söhnelein
    uns selbst tut verehr'n.

_Der große Hirt._

    Ach mein herzliebstes Jesulein,
    wenn ich was bei mir hätt,
    das ich dir verehren tät!
    Nun diesen Apfel geb ich dir,
    das ewge Leben schenkst du mir.

_Der kleine Hirt._

    Ach mein herzliebstes Jesulein,
    wenn ich a was bei mir hätt,
    das ich dir verehren tät!
    Ich hab noch ein alt hart Rinnel Brot,
    hobs länger als vier Wochen in mein Kober gehot,
    do, Alter, iß du's.

Nun singt der _Chor_ den Liedvers:

    »Heut schleußt er wieder auf die Tür«

wie im Zschopauer Spiel. Der _heilige Christ_ spricht die Schlußworte:

    Ihr Kinderlein, zur gute Nacht
    seid nur auf Lob und Dank bedacht
    und grüßet Jesum, Gottes Sohn,
    der heut kimmt von des Himmels Thron.
    Er wird dies Jahr noch oft einkehren
    und übers Jahr vielmehr bescheren.

Mit einem Liedvers schließt das Spiel, während sich die Engelschar
entfernt.


Das Königswalder Spiel.

Dieses verrät eine Verwandtschaft mit dem vorigen Spiel. Nur die
Hirtenszene weist einige Abweichungen auf. Das Wiederholen der
Schlußzeilen ist ebenfalls durchgeführt.

_Urban._

    Wir hom fast die ganze Nacht --

_Stephan._

    ganze Nacht --

_Urban._

    Mit Wachen und Blosen zugebracht.

_Stephan._

    zugebracht.

_Urban._

    Sonst hätte mir der Wölfe Schar
    meine Schaf gefressen ganz und gar.
    Auch freist mich sehr an meine Füß,
    weil es so grimmig kalt do is,
    so will ich när noch emol blosen,
    daß der Wolf tut meine Schof mit Frieden losen. --
    Ei blos ich net wie ä Jagersma?

_Stephan._

    Jagersma!
    Mit dir allein do will ich ga,
    weil es so grimmig kalt do is,
    daß ich erwarme meine Füß.

_Engel_ singt:

    ~Gloria, Gloria, in excelsis deo Gloria!~

_Urban._

    Horch, Stephan, is dos net a wunnerlich Ding?

_Stephan._

    Wunnerlich Ding!

_Urban._

    Mich deuchts, als wenn a Engel singt.
    Ei, muß dos net Freud im Himmel sein,
    wenn singe die lieben Engelein!

_Stephan._

    Was geht uns ober dos a?
    Wir wolln ein wenig ins Fald nei ga.

_Engel._

    Hirten, stehet still.
    Was ich sagen will:
    Heut ist geboren zu Bethlehem ein Kindelein,
    genannt das liebe Jesulein,
    es liegt in einem Krippelein
    und ruht auf dürrem Gras,
    davon ein Rind und Esel fraß.
    Darum gehet hin und forschet die Geschicht,
    von welcher ich euch hab bericht!

_Stephan._

    Nun, Urban, nun glaub ich deinen Worten,
    die ich mit meinen Ohren gehört.

_Urban._

    So glaubst du nun an die heiligen himmlischen Heerscharen,
    die uns große Dinge tun offenbaren,
    nämlich, daß in Bethlehem ein Kindlein soll geboren sein,
    genannt das liebe Jesulein.
    Ei so wolln wir gan und erfahrn die Sachen.

_Stephan._

    Wenn ich gleich soll gehen mit,
    war bleibt do, dar die Schof behüt?

_Urban._

    Wos sorgst du für die Schof so sehr,
    ich wollt, daß wir von hinnen wärn.
    Gott, der uns dies tat offenbarn,
    der wird auch unser Viech bewahrn!

        Die Hirten vor der Krippe.

_Urban._

    Gott grüß Euch, mein lieber Alter!

_Joseph._

    Schön'n Dank! Schön'n Dank!

_Urban._

    Ist das der König der Ehren?
    Ist das das liebe Jesulein,
    welches ein großmächtiger König und Herr soll sein?
    Seine Gewalt über Himmel und Erden
    und dessen Reich kein Ende soll werden?

_Joseph._

    Ja, ja, ja.

Die Anbetung der Hirten geschieht mit denselben Worten wie im Wiesaer
Spiel.


Das Bärensteiner Spiel.

Die Erhaltung verdanken wir dem Oberförster Timäus in Unterwiesenthal.
Sein Gewährsmann ist der Waldwärter Göbel, der es im Jahre 1900 von
einem Schuhmacher Fritz Meyer in Bärenstein, der selbst noch an den
Spielen teilgenommen, aufgezeichnet erhielt. Man vergleiche besonders
die Bescherungsszene mit der im Wiesaer Spiel. Das Stück ist enthalten
in den Mitteilungen des Vereins für Sächsische Volkskunde, Band II,
Heft 3.

I.

1. und 2. Engel singen »Vom Himmel hoch«. 1. Vers.

II.

Die ganze Schar singt »Vom Himmel kam der Engel Schar«.

III.

Der _heilge Christ_ singt

    Einen schönen Abend insgemein,
    Wir sind gekommen zu euch rein
    Und wollen sehen zu dieser Frist,
    ob Aufrichtigkeit und Religion noch ist,
    die Eltern auch geliebt,
    mit Willen nie betrübt,
    was sie befohlen euch
    und sie erzürnet nicht.

IV.

_Nikolaus_ spricht zum Knecht Martin oder Ruprecht.

    Wir wollen von hinnen fahren
    und wollen unsre Schätz auf fromme Kinder sparen.
    Und wer fein fromm gewesen ist, den will er freundlich loben,
    Komm immer, komm herein, du heilger Christ von oben.
    Nun Martin, fang du an und laß die Kinder beten,
    Weihnachtsgebetlein zum Katechisma treten.
    Schämt euch der Arbeit nicht, red auch kein schnippig Wort,
    in Schulen sitzt fein still und bleibt an euren Ort.
    So will ich euch Gold, Silber, Schmuck und Perlen bringen,
    wenn ihr werd't fahren fort mit Beten, Lesen und Singen.

V.

Gesang: Ich freue mich in dir und heiße dich willkommen usw. 1. Vers.

VI.

_Joseph_ und _Maria_. Joseph spricht beim Wirt um Herberge an:

    Schön guten Abend, mein lieber Herr Wirt,
    Ich und das Weib, wir kommen aus der Stadt Galiläa
    Und wollen fragen um Herberge ah.

_Wirt._

    Mein lieber alter Mann, das kann nicht sein,
    es sind bei mir gekehret ein
    viel tapfere Herren und Frauen ein.
    Reist weg von mir, ihr könnt hier keine Herberge bekommen.

_Joseph._

    Es ist lauter Gottesgeschick,
    wir Armen ham halt gar kä Gelück,
    Herze Maria, gieh du na,
    weil ich nischt richten ka.

_Maria_ spricht den Wirt an. (Die Worte waren dem Ueberlieferer
entfallen.)

_Wirt_ (antwortet).

    Für eure große Aufrichtigkeit
    sag ichs euch zum letzten Mal,
    vergonnen soll euch sein der Stall.

Gesang von _Maria_ und _Joseph_: Lobt Gott ihr Christen allzugleich. 1.
Vers.

VII.

_Hirten_ liegen am Boden schlafend.

Ein Engel verkündigt:

    Ihr Hirten und Schäfer, steht, (auf?)
    hört, was ich euch sagen will.
    Uns ist ein Kind geboren
    zu Bethlehem in Davids Stadt,
    wie Micha das verkündigt hat.

Hirten erwachen und der _erste Hirt_ spricht:

    Schaut Brüder, was ist das für ein Zeichen,
    das am Himmel sich erregt,
    es muß ganz neues was bedeuten,
    weil er ganz alleine steht. (!)

Der _zweite Hirt_ spricht:

    Drum ihr Brüder auf,
    wir wollen gehen einen Lauf,
    und wollen nach Bethlehem gahn,
    und wollen nach dem Kindlein fran,
    wie uns der Engel hat kundgetan.

Der _dritte Hirt_ spricht:

    Wir werdens noch erfahren heut (!)

VIII.

_Opferung der Hirten und Schäfer_ bei Joseph, Maria und neugeborenem
Kind im Stalle.

_Gesang der Engel_: ~Gloria in exelsis deo, et in der Apacemine was
trollenfollendatis.~[13]

_Lied für die ganze Schar._

    O Fürstenkind aus Davids Stamm,
    du meiner Seelen Bräutigam,
    mein Licht, mein Trost, mein Leben.
    Schließ ich in mir (?) in mein Herze,
    daß ich scherze, und dich küsse,
    dich auf ewig lieben müsse.

_Lied der Schäfer._

    Das Schäferleben mich ergötzt,
    weil es so lustig ist,
    denn wo ich nur den Fuß hinsetz
    ist alle Müh versüßt.
    Das Ohr zu hören wird nicht matt.
    Das Aug zu sehen wird nicht satt,
    den Schäferstab ich lieb.


Das Grünhainichener Spiel.

Dieses, obwohl auch ein Bruchstück eines älteren, ist bis in die
neueste Zeit gespielt worden. Herr Gewerbelehrer Martin von der
Spielwarenfachschule hat dazu eine anschauliche Zeichnung geliefert,
die in Postkartenform weit verbreitet ist. Als Besonderheit führt das
Spiel den heiligen Petrus mit dem Schlüssel mit. Die Gesänge sind
jedenfalls später eingefügt worden.

    _Gesang_: »Stille Nacht, heilige Nacht«

_Knecht Ruprecht._

    Euch grüßt Knecht Ruprecht wohlbekannt
    den artgen Kindern im ganzen Land
    und auch den Schlimmen mit Sack und Stecken
    bringt er Freude zugleich auch Schrecken.
    Knecht Ruprecht als ein Heidenkind
    trat einst zu Christi ingesinnt
    geht nun als Weihnachtsmann voran.
    Bereit dem Christkind gern die Bahn
    und weil es ihm so herzlich freut
    so singt: »O du fröhliche Weihnachtszeit«
    singt Alle, Baß, Tenor, Sopran
    im Himmel stimm' wirs reiner an.

    _Gesang_: »O du fröhliche, o du selige«

_1. Hirt._

    Aus Davids Haus, dem kahlen Stumpf
    tief aus der Armut düstern Sumpf
    hast du das arme Paar gesehen
    die Davidssprossen nach Bethlehem gehen?

_2. Hirt._

    Wie macht deine Rede mein Herz so froh,
    noch lebt der alte Davidsstamm
    von dem man solange nichts vernahm.

_1. Hirt._

    Der Himmel geht auf und Engelscharen
    seh ich im Glanz herniederfahren.

_Engel._

    Fürchtet euch nicht, fürchtet euch nicht,
    siehe ich verkünde euch große Freude,
    die allem Volke widerfahren wird
    denn euch ist heute der Heiland geboren,
    welcher ist Christus der Herr in der Stadt Davids.
    Und das habt zum Zeichen,
    ihr werdet finden, das Kind in Windeln
    gewickelt und in einer Krippe liegend.

_Gesang des Engels._

    Ehre sei Gott in der Höhe
    und Frieden auf Erden
    und den Menschen ein Wohlgefallen.

_König._

    Sei mir gegrüßet Himmelsheld,
    gegrüßt du Heiland aller Welt.
    Denn deine schwarzen Brüder auch im Süden,
    nimmst du nun auf in deines Reiches Frieden.

    _Gesang_: »Es ist ein Ros entsprungen«

_Der heilge Christ._

    Hab draußen den Gesang vernommen
    und bin deshalb hierher gekommen,
    denn wo man ehrt den heilgen Christ,
    er jederzeit erschienen ist.

_Petrus._

    Auch ich bin nur hier eingekehrt
    weil ich ein christlich Lied gehört.
    Darf ich nun noch ein Sprüchlein hoffen
    steht euch der Himmel heut schon offen.
    Dem werd' ichs Himmelstor aufschließen,
    die im Gebet den Herrn geprießen.

    _Gesang_: »Fröhliche Weihnacht überall«
    oder »Alle Jahre wieder.«

_Der heilge Christ._

    Nun laßt uns gehn zum nächsten Haus,
    schon lange harren dort die Kleinen
    und lugen längst zum Fenster aus,
    ob er nicht recht bald wird erscheinen
    der heilge Christ. Bleibt alle fromm
    auf daß ihr einmal zu mir kommt.


Das Cranzahler Spiel.

Mosen (Seite 31) schreibt darüber, daß die meisten Mitglieder dieser
Engelschar wegen der Aufführung bestraft worden seien, aber »mit
brennendster Begier die Erlaubnis zur Wiederholung ihres Spiels«
wünschten. Sämtliche Rollen wurden nur von Männern dargestellt, auch
die der Maria. Das Vorspiel gleicht dem Wiesaer, nur die Hirtenszenen
sind ausführlicher.

Die _Hirten_ singen beim Auftreten.

    Frohlocket, ihr Himmel, mit englischer Wonne,
    weil Jesus geboren, die himmlische Sonne.
    Es jauchzen die Völker, es singet die Welt,
    weil Jesus heimsuchet das Erdengezelt.
    Heut singen die Engel, heut lachet der Himmel,
    heut jauchzet und springet das Erdengetümmel.

Nach der Anbetung im Stalle sangen sie:

    Drauf finden die Hirten und loben mit Schalle
    das Jesulein, liegend im finstern Stalle,
    sie fallen zu Füßen und beten es an,
    als ihnen die Engel dies kundbar getan.
    Heut singen die Engel, heut jauchzen die Himmel,
    heut jauchzet und springet das Erdengetümmel.

Beim Zusammentreffen der drei Könige spricht _Melchior_:

    Im Namen Jesu seid gegrüßt!
    Ich bring euch gute neue Zeit,
    die euch der Herr mit Freuden geit.
    Euch ist geboren der edle Held,
    der erlösen wird die ganze Welt.
    Drum laßt uns eilend und behend
    hinziehen nach demselben End,
    an welchem Ort zu dieser Frist
    der neue König geboren ist.
    Denselben wollen wir beten an,
    und ihm auch unsere Huldigung tan,
    wir wollen ihn verehren mit unserm Geschenk,
    dabei er unser stets gedenk.

Sie kommen zu _Herodes_ und sprechen:

    Glück zu, mein lieber König Herodes!
    Sie sagen ihm, daß ein Kindlein geboren sei,
    welches ein großmächtiger König und Herr soll sein,
    seine Gewalt über Himmel und Erden.

Da gerät er in heftigen Zorn:

    Potz Quintus Florus, was hör ich nun!
    Was soll ich in meinen Sachen tun?
    Soll sein ein neuer König geboren,
    so wäre mein ganzes Reich verloren.
    O Jammer über Jammer groß!
    Wie stehet meine Sache bloß!
    Soll sein ein neuer König zur Hand,
    so treibt er mich aus meinem Land.

Die Anbetung der Könige findet sich in der Zusammenstellung am Ende
dieses Bandes.

Nachdem der Engel die Weisen gewarnt hat, zu Herodes zurückzukehren,
spricht _Kasper_:

    Dieweil wir nun im Traum von dem Engel haben gehört,
    daß wir sollen ziehen einen andern Weg,
    so laßt uns aufmachen zur Hand
    und ziehen durch ein ander Land.

Dann fordert der Engel Joseph zur Flucht auf und dieser spricht zu
Maria:

    Nun Maria, laß dir sagen,
    wir sollen das Kind nach Aegypten tragen.

_Maria._

    Es soll an mir kein Mangel sein,
    komm immer, mein liebes Jesulein,
    wir wollen schnell und behend
    reisen nach unserm Elend.

_Joseph._

    Packt zusammen!

Der Chor singt nun den Liedvers: »Wo werd ich Dich nun finden? zu
Bethlehem nicht mehr usf.« Die Herodesszene beginnt mit den Worten:

_Herodes._

    Mein lieber Diener, hast du nichts vernommen,
    ob diese Personen sind wiedergekommen?

Als er das Gegenteil erfährt, wird er wütend:

    Ei, da schlag Blei und Pulver drein,
    sollten sie gewiß vorüber sein?

Er beschließt den Kindermord:

    Und sollten alle Kinder sterben,
    so muß der König auch verderben;
    das Kinderblut ist meine Lust,
    dieweils mich Kron und Szepter kost't.
    Drum, auf, ihr Diener, eilt geschwind,
    und helft mir suchen das jüdische Kind.
    Wenn einer solches ausrichten kann,
    der soll haben mein halb Königreich zum Lohn.

_Diener._

    Mit meiner Macht und starker Hand,
    will ich gehn durchs ganze jüdische Land
    und töten alsobald alle Knaben
    von zwei Jahren alt zu Ehren mein,
    haun und stechen mit meiner Kling und Spitzen;
    Den großen Hauf und das Fräulein
    wird sie mit Knabenblut bespritzen.
    Zu Ehren des Herren mein
    will ich meine Macht beweisen,
    mit Rach und unbarmherziger Hand,
    die euch durchdringet Stahl und Eisen,
    zu schützen meines Herren Kron,
    davon ich soll haben sein halb Königreich zum Lohn.

Dann spricht er dreimal den _Satz_:

    Ich suche Blut und übe Rach' an jungen Knaben aus.

Der _Chor_ singt.

    Auf sperren sie den Rachen weit
    und wollen uns verschlingen.
    Lob und Dank sei Gott alle Zeit,
    es wird ihn'n nicht gelingen.
    Er wird ihren Strick zerreißen gar
    und stürzen ihre falsche Lahr,
    sie werdens Gott nicht wehren.

Nun tritt der _Diener_ wieder ein und spricht:

    Ich hab gekämpft und wollt obsiegen gar,
    nun aber muß ich schamrot werden ganz und gar;
    ich suchte wohl, fand aber nichts,
    nach dem sich tät mein Mut erreichen.
    Mit Rach und Tyrannei ist nichts getan,
    Das muß ich jetzt bezeugen.
    Ich hätte gern vollführt, was mir vom König ward bestellt,
    nun aber ist mir erst der ganze Sinn und Mut gefällt;
    Drum leg ich nieder Wehr und Waffen
    und hab mit der Gerechten Blut nichts mehr zu schaffen.

Die nächste Szene haben wir uns in Ägypten zu denken. Der Engel
verkündet dem Joseph, daß die Feinde gestorben sein. Da spricht
_Joseph_:

    Höre, Maria, wir sollen schnell und behend,
    reisen wieder nach Bethlehem,
    Gott wird uns erhalten bis an unser End.

Nun singt die ganze Engelschar eine »Arie«, die so beginnt:

    Was wird mir mein herzliebes Jesulein geben?
                Himmlisches Leben!

Der Sternenengel beschließt das Spiel mit den Worten:

    Nun, lieben Freunde insgemein,
    nun haben Sie vernommen fein
    und ohne Zweifel frei genommen,
    wie es mit dem Kindlein sei gekommen,
    daß es mußt gleich nach seiner Geburt
    fortziehen an einen fremden Ort,
    und wie Herodes falsche List
    hernach zu nichte worden ist,
    und wie die Weisen aus Morgenland
    ihm groß Geschenk verehret haben.
    Der Fried des Herrn sei mit euch,
    einen guten Abend haben Sie allzugleich,
    dazu ein fröhlich neues Jahr;
    Gott helf, daß es uns allen widerfahr,
    Gott helf, daß er nach dieser Zeit
    uns bringe zu der Ewigkeit.

Der Vers: »Heut schleußt er wieder auf die Tür« beschließt auch das
Cranzahler Spiel.

Aus dem


Mildenauer Spiel

teilt Mosen nur einige Verse des Wirtes mit, die in unserem Schlußspiel
am Anfang des Krippenspiels, Nr. 5, gesprochen werden.


Das Neudorfer Spiel.

Im Jahre 1860 lernte Gustav Mosen bei seinen Forschungen nach
Christspielen in Neudorf einen 90jährigen Greis kennen, einen gewissen
Oeser, der das ganze Neudorfer Spiel im Gedächtnis hatte. Kantor
Türke in Neudorf hat Mosen das Spiel aufgeschrieben, und -- was noch
bedeutsamer ist -- auch die Weisen der Lieder mit, sodaß auf diese
Weise einige köstliche Gesänge überliefert worden sind. Das Spiel
enthält einige Szenen, die in den Resten der anderen Engelscharen nicht
erkennbar sind. Zunächst singt der Chor in der Hausflur den 1. Vers des
Liedes: »Vom Himmel kam der Engel Schar.« Während dieses Gesanges kniet
der Engel Gabriel auf der Türschwelle. Hierauf erhebt er sich, tritt
mit feierlichen Schritten in das Zimmer und spricht:

    In diesem Hause sei des höchsten Gottes Friede,
    den angemeldet hat in einem neuen Liede
    der Engel aller Schar in dieser frohen Nacht,
    die uns der Völker Heil und Licht zuweggebracht.
    Zu des Augustus Zeit ist uns ein Sohn gegeben,
    der uns gebähnet hat den Weg zum Himmel eben.
    Ihr Leute, höret zu, was von dem Kinde sagt
    ein jeder unter uns, und seid ganz unverzagt.

Die Schar kommt herein und _Joseph_ spricht:

    Mein Herz ist voll lauter Not.
    Maria, die schöne Braut,
    ist mir zum ehelichen Weibe anvertraut;
    allein man sagt jetzt allerorten,
    sie wär, ich weiß nicht wie, schwanger worden.
    Nun werd ich mir den Vorsatz fassen,
    um sie bald heimlich zu verlassen.
    Nun wird mir mein Herz so schwer!
    Ich will mich ein wenig ducken hieher.

Er legt seinen Kopf auf den Tisch, als ob er schliefe. Jetzt tritt der
_Engel Gabriel_ zu ihm und sagt:

    Joseph, du frommer Mann,
    Fürcht dich nicht, daß ich zu dir komm'!
    Du sollst deiner Gemahlin dich nicht schämen,
    sollst sie frei öffentlich zu dir nehmen;
    dem das in ihr geboren ist,
    ist nicht geschehn durch Menschenlist,
    noch von eines Mannes Fleisch und Blut,
    sondern von dem heiligen Geiste gut.
    Sie wird gebären ein Söhnelein,
    das sollst du heißen Jesulein.

_Joseph_ _(erwachend)_.

    Was? Wie? Ist denn niemand allhier?
    Wer hat jetzund geredet mit mir?
    Ist es ein Traum? Wird er mir wahr,
    so komm ich doch aus der Gefahr.
    Nun werd ich mit Freuden ihr Mann,
    ich will ihr dienen, womit ich kann,
    sie soll mein liebes Eheweib sein.
    Nun komm, Maria, du bist doch mein.

_Maria._

    Joseph, mein lieber Mann,
    das hat dir der Engel kundgetan,
    daß deine falsche List fürwahr
    hat müssen werden offenbar.

Im Chore werden nun zwei Strophen des Liedes: »Fürstensohn aus Davids
Stamm« gesungen. Der nächste Teil, das Herbergsspiel, entspricht ganz
dem Wiesaer. Dann folgt das reizende Lied: »Bethlehem uns wundert
alle«, das auch in unserer Zusammenstellung aufgenommen worden ist. Nun
folgt das Hirtenspiel:

_1. Hirt._

    Wie wird es denn so licht? Ach, Bruder, ach, es blitzt!

_2. Hirt._

    Vor Angst und Bangigkeit mein ganzer Leib so schwitzt.

_1. Hirt._

    Ei, ei, es läßt nicht nach; mir wird sehr angst und bang.

_2. Hirt._

    Das Herze bebt vor Furcht; ich warte da nicht lang.

_1. Hirt._

    Ei, wer nur laufen könnt! Ich wollte gerne gehn.

_2. Hirt._

    Ich kann vor Angst kaum mehr auf meinen Füßen stehn.

Der Engel erscheint. Nach seiner Verkündigung singt die ganze Schar:

    Der Engel verkündiget herzliche Freude
    den Hirten im Felde bei nächtlicher Weide.
    Glückselige Leute, ach fürchtet euch nicht
    vor diesem euch plötzlich erscheinenden Licht.
    Heut singen die Engel, heut lachet der Himmel,
    heut jauchzet und springet das Erdengetümmel.

_1. Hirt._

    Ach, Bruder, wie schlug mir die Furcht in alle Glieder,
    da sich des Himmels Glanz ließ in den Wolken nieder.
    Das macht der Engel Wort, daß alle Furcht vergeht,
    und nun mein ganzer Sinn nach diesem Kinde steht.

Der zweite Hirt stimmt bei. Die nächste Szene, die Anbetung der Hirten,
ist in unser Schlußspiel aufgenommen, ebenso das überaus liebliche
Wiegenlied »Kommet her zu dieser Krippe.«

Merkwürdigerweise folgt nun das Bescherungsspiel. Der heilige Christ
fragt nach dem Wohlverhalten der Kinder. Raphael und Nikolaus klagen
sie an, Petrus bittet für die Kinder.

_Knecht Ruprecht_ poltert:

    Die bösen Kinder sind und bleiben alle mein,
    drum nehm ich sie mit und steck sie in meinen großen langen
      Sack hinein.

Nach dem Gesang des alten Liedes: »Da Christus geboren war« ermahnt
nun der heilige Christ die Kinder und Petrus stellt das Examen an. Der
Vers: »Heut schleußt er wieder auf die Tür« und eine Ansprache des
heiligen Christ beschließen auch dieses Spiel.

Beim Hinausgehen spricht _Ruprecht_ noch:

    Ich wünsche euch viel tausend guten Morgen,
    Der Himmel mag für euch und eure Jungfern sorgen.

Im Anschluß an die Wiedergabe des Spiels gedenkt Mosen noch des »alten
Oeser«, der nicht allein die Niederschrift der Neudorfer Engelschar
ermöglichte, sondern durch seine Erzählungen den Gelehrten überhaupt
veranlaßte, im Erzgebirge nach solchen Spielen zu suchen. Die Frucht
dieser Studien, das fortwährend erwähnte Mosensche Buch, ist die
hauptsächlichste Fundgrube für dies alte Volksgut, deshalb möchten
alle, die überhaupt an solcher Volksdichtung Freude haben, sich des
»alten Oeser« und des liebenswürdigen Gustav Mosen gern erinnern.


Das Lengefelder Spiel.

Das Mosensche Buch hat vielleicht auch den, um die Erforschung des
geistigen Lebens unserer Erzgebirgler, hochverdienten Dr. Alfred Müller
in Auerbach zu seinen Forschungen veranlaßt. Die hauptsächlichste
Frucht seiner Studien ist meiner Meinung nach die Aufzeichnung des
sogenannten Lengefelder Spiels, das auch in Marienberg zu Haus
gewesen sein soll. Es ist zuerst veröffentlicht in dem Aufsatze »Ein
altertümlicher Christumzug« von Dr. Alfred Müller in Nr. 12, Jahrgang
19 des Glückauf. Hier treten außer den gewohnten Personen auch noch
Moses und der Tod auf. Den Beginn bildet das Hirtenspiel.

Die beiden Hirten klagen über die große Kälte und ihre erbärmliche Lage:

    »Wenn Kieselstä Toler wärn
    un Dukaten in dr Mistpfütz lägn«

wollte sich Märten eine neue Pelzmütze kaufen, und Daniel klagt gar
über den Geiz seiner Frau. In diese sehr profanen Erörterungen tritt
plötzlich ein _Engel_:

    »Gelobet seist du Jesus Christ,
    der du Mensch geboren bist!
    Und wie es schon vorher bekannt,
    die Hirten waren von Gott gesandt,
    zu verkündigen das, was geschehn!
    Zu Davids Stadt in Bethlehem
    der heilge Christ geboren ist;
    des soll sich freuen ein jeder Christ.
    Er bringt mit sich viel schöne Gaben
    für Mädchen und für junge Knaben.
    Ich soll nun bereiten den neuen Thron;
    drauf soll er sich setzen mit seiner Ehrenkron,
    komm rein du schöner heilger Christ,
    weil dir schon alles bereitet ist.«
    Stimmt ein, ihr lieben Engelein,
    lobt Gott und singet fein.

Nun wird eine Choralstrophe gesungen, z. B. »Vom Himmel hoch.« Nun
setzt sich der heilge Christ auf einen Stuhl und die Schar ordnet sich
um ihn. Links stehen die drei »Hellen«, d. i. die drei Engel und der
Tod, rechts stehen die drei »Schwarzen«, Moses, Andreas und Petrus, die
einen schwarzen Talar tragen. Petrus trägt einen Schlüssel, Andreas
ein kleines Szepter, Moses eine Gesetztafel. Der Ruprecht oder Ruppas
trägt als besonderen Schmuck eine Maske, an deren Stirn sich ein langes
Horn befindet; vielleicht eine Erinnerung an den Teufel, sodaß in dem
Spiel tatsächlich der Tod und der Teufel auftreten. Der _Ruprecht_ ist
auch hier grob:

    Potz Schwefel und potz Pech!
    Wie kommen wir alle hier zurecht?
    Und wenn das meine Mutter wüßt,
    daß ich hier wär, würde sie lachen,
    daß ihr der Pelz würde krachen.
    Ich will einschlagen die Kreuz und die Quer;
    ich will schlagen,
    daß man sie muß in Säcken naustragen.

Die _Engel_ weisen ihn zurecht:

    Du unverschämter stolzer Tropf,
    juckt dir der alte Drachenkopf,
    daß du so plötzlich tust fallen ein,
    wo Gott und seine lieben Englein sein?

Den Streit endet der _heilge Christ_:

    Einen schön' guten Abend will Gott euch geben,
    Gesundheit und ein langes Leben.
    Ich bin gekommen zu dieser Frist,
    ich bin genannt »der heilige Christ!«
    Ich bin vom Himmel auf Erden gekommen
    und hab mir das Schauen vorgenommen;
    ich will sehen, ob die Kindelein
    fromm und fleißig gewesen sein.
    Von welchen ich solches hör und vernehm,
    die sollen mich finden bequem;
    ich will sie erfreuen durch mein Geschenk,
    auf daß sie sollen sein mein eingedenk.
    Von denen ich aber werd anders hören,
    die sollen meinen Zorn verspüren.
    Drum, Andreas, du Diener mein,
    examinier mir die Kindelein.

_Andreas_ will nicht, die Englein seien besser informiert, doch bekennt
er:

    Es mangelt nicht an Sünden groß;
    die Welt treibt Böses ohn Unterlaß!

Der Erzengel _Michael_ wird noch deutlicher:

    An Herren, Frauen und Gesind
    sich oftmals großer Mangel findt;
    dein göttlich Wort wird sehr veracht',
    ein jeder auf sein Vorteil tracht.

Da nimmt _der Tod_ das Wort. Er ist sehr überlegen und temperamentvoll.
Seine Worte stehen in unserem Schlußspiel in der Kindermordszene.

Nach ihm kommt _Moses_:

    Ich bin Moses, arm und elend geboren;
    ein Mann von Gott bin ich auserkoren.
    Ich hab die Kinder Israel geführt
    aus dem Diensthaus Pharao,
    aus der Fremdlinge Heer
    und trocken durch das Rote Meer.
    Auf dem Berg Sinai, da schrie ich zu Gott,
    da empfing ich die heiligen zehn Gebot,
    da schrieb mirs Gott auf zwei steinerne Tafeln,
    daß ichs dem Menschengeschlecht hervor sollte tragen.

_1. Engel._

    Hör an, du Diener Moses von Gott,
    sag an, wie lauten die heiligen zehn Gebot!
    Wie lautet das erste Gebot?

_Moses._

    Du sollst auf der ganzen Erden
    nur einen einz'gen Gott anbeten.

_1. Engel._

    Wie lautet das zweite Gebot?

_Moses._

    Du sollst nicht führen in Unehren
    den Namen Gottes mit Fluchen und Schwören.

Jedes Gebot wird durch ein kurzes Reimchen erläutert; zum Teil in recht
passender Weise:

    Du sollst nicht töten zürniglich,
    nicht hassen noch selbst rächen dich.

    oder:

    Dein Eh' sollst du bewahren rein,
    auf daß dein Herz kein andern mein.

Zuletzt fragt der _heilge Christ_ den Tod:

    Hör an, du Tod,
    haben auch die Leute gehalten die zehn Gebot?

Der unerbittliche _Tod_ sagt unter Beifallsbezeugungen Ruprechts:

    Nicht eins, Herr, ich vernein,
    sie haben gehalten nicht eins.
    Mit dem ersten Gebot
    habens getrieben nur Spott;
    es ist auch nicht dabei geblieben,
    sie haben Abgötterei getrieben.
    Zum andern habens geführt in Unehren
    den Namen Gottes mit Fluchen und Schwören;
    es ist auch nicht dabei geblieben,
    sie haben Zauberei getrieben.
    Zum dritten habens gesündigt greulich,
    haben den Feiertag nicht gehalten heilig,
    haben sich lassen den Teufel belehren,
    haben nicht einmal auf die Predigt wollen hören.
    Zum vierten haben Vater und Mutter nicht wollen ehren,
    haben sich kein Bubenstück lassen wehren:
    So die Eltern was wider ihre Kinder wollten sagen,
    haben sie sie wollen zum Haus nausjagen.
    Zum fünften, dem hört, was ich werd weiter sagen:
    Sie haben einander gar totgeschlagen;
    habens nicht können tun mit den Händen,
    habens wollen gleichsam mit der Zunge vollenden.
    Zum sechsten habens die Ehe gebrochen.
    Ach, Herr, laß nicht ungerochen!
    Zum siebenten ist ihnen auch nicht verhohlen:
    Sie haben einander Geld und Gut gestohlen;
    haben sie's nicht können tun bei der Nacht,
    habens mit falschen Artikeln an sich gebracht.

    usw. bis zum Schluß,

    daß Gott ein eifriger Gott ist,
    und alle, die ihn hassen,
    wird er nicht ungestraft lassen.

Das betrübt den _heiligen Christ_:

    Ei, das ist böse Mär!
    Warum sind wir gekommen her?
    Mich reuts, daß wir auf diesem Plan
    so schöne Gaben haben schon lan.
    Weil sie nun so böse sein,
    so wollen wir nach dem Himmel eiln.

Doch fordert er noch den Moses auf, zu examinieren. Dies geschieht, und
das Ergebnis ist so, daß Moses den Herrn bittet:

    Ach, heilger Christ, sei nicht so hart!
    Es ist ja wider deine Art.
    Bist du nicht gütig, fromm und mild
    und das rechte Liebesbild?
    Willst du nun zum Himmel eilen
    und die Gaben nicht austeilen?
    Die Kinder lassen sich erbitten;
    sie wollen lernen bessre Sitten
    und sich hinfort zum neuen Jahr
    recht richten nach der Eltern Lahr.

Trotz des Protestes Ruprechts gibt der _heilge Christ_ dieser Fürbitte
nach:

    Wenn sie ferner wollen frömmer sein
    und leben nach dem Willen mein,
    ich wills versuchen, will wiederkehren,
    auch meine Gebote freundlich lehren.
    Ihr Kinder dürft euch nicht mehr fürchten;
    mein Zorn ist ganz und gar geschlicht',
    euch bin ich hold, will euch bescheren
    und Gottesfurcht euch selber lehren.

Auch hier schließt der Liedvers: »Heut schleußt er wieder auf die Tür«
das Spiel. Der erste Engel spricht aber noch folgenden Epilog:

    Gute Nacht, ihr lieben Kindelein!
    Gehorchet euren Eltern fein,
    so wird das liebe Jesulein
    stets euer liebes Brüderlein sein.
    Solches hab ich euch zuvor gesagt,
    Vater, Mutter, Mädchen und auch Knaben.
    Im Namen Gottes, Amen!
    Das werde wahr!
    Gott geb euch ein gutes neues Jahr!

Mit diesen Worten sind auch die Schatten, die der Tod über das Spiel
warf, verscheucht.


Das Thalheimer Spiel.

Im Hauptstaatsarchiv zu Dresden befindet sich unter III, 100 Fol. 1~e~
~sub~ + ein im Jahre 1873 vom Stollberger Amtsgericht eingeliefertes
Aktenstück aus dem Jahre 1805 ff, welches die Bezeichnung trägt:
»Die von einigen Bergleuten und Strumpfwürkern zu Thalheim begangene
strafwürdige Handlung bey Darstellung der Geschichte der Geburt Jesu
unter der Benennung des heil. Drey Königen- oder Engelscharspiel betr.«

Die Veranlassung der Einleitung der Untersuchung gab ein Manuskript
unter der Ueberschrift: »Traurige Begebenheit zur Sittengeschichte
unserer Zeiten.« Dieses war beim Schneeberger Wochenblatt eingegangen,
man hatte aber Bedenken getragen, es abzudrucken, da der Verfasser sich
nicht nennen wollte. Durch Vermittlung des Schneeberger Amts-Physikus
ging es aber schließlich an das Stollberger Amt, das für Thalheim
zuständig war, und das die Angelegenheit aufgriff.

Was war nun eigentlich geschehen? Lassen wir das interessante
Schriftstück folgen:

»Traurige Beyträge zur Sittengeschichte unserer Zeiten: Thalheim bei
Stollberg i. Erzgeb. Mit welchem Vergnügen liest man in Sachsen die
so schönen öfters herauskommenden Landes-Befehle, welche alle die
Hoffnungen erwecken, daß durch diese, jene Ueberbleibsel roher Zeiten,
jene Finsternis, aus unserem Vaterlande verschwinden müssen. Welcher
Wunsch könnte nun von einem Jeden, dem Vaterlandswohl am Herzen liegt,
herzlicher und inniger seyn, als: daß nun auch über diese Befehle
gewacht, auf Befolgung derselben gehalten werden möchte; welches
aber leider! nicht immer der Fall ist. Von vielen Polizey-Aufsehern
kann man wohl eigentlich sagen: ein gut Theil schlafen -- oder mit
sehenden Augen sehen sie nicht -- mit hörenden Ohren hören sie nicht
-- denn ich fand diese Wahrheit in Thalheim mehr als begründet; da
beinahe jede gesetzwidrige Handlung, jede Thorheit, von den dasigen
Polizey-Aufsehern gebilliget wird. Ich theile Ihnen, Freunde des
Vaterlandes, hier eine solche schädliche und abgeschmackte Thorheit
mit, welche ich bey einer Durchreise durch Thalheim kennen lernte.
Was mir zuerst auffiel, da ich den Ort betrat, war eine Frau, die
sich Brod und Erdäpfel erbettelte. Da ich mich bey ihr erkundigte,
ob viel Arme hier wären, versetzte sie: »Kein Dorf im ganzen Gebirge
kann mehr Hilfsbedürftige zählen, als Thalheim; beinahe jede Hütte
ist eine Wohnung der Armuth und des Elends, wo die mehrsten Menschen
mit bleichen, halbhungrigen und halbbekleideten Körpern, hinter dem
Wollrade nach Hülfe und Brod seufzen.« Von dieser Erzählung ganz bewegt
und in tiefes Mitleid gegen die Armen dieses Ortes versunken, ging
ich, ohne auf etwas zu sehen und zu hören, weiter. Allein, da ich in
die Mitte des Dorfes kam, wurde ich von dem Wohlstande Thalheims ganz
anders belehrt. Hier sah ich eine Schar zusammengelaufener Narren, die
mit Goldpapier und Flittergold behangen und beklebt waren und ein noch
größerer Trupp Müßiggänger machte den Beschluß, daß man in Gefahr kam,
erdrückt zu werden. Ein ziemlich bejahrter Mann, dem ich begegnete,
der mir diesen tumultarischen Aufzug erklärte, was er zu bedeuten
habe, sagte: Diese zusammengelaufene Rotte wären theils leichte
Strumpfwirker, die nicht arbeiten wollten und theils einige Bergleute,
die in der Weihnachts- und Neujahrszeit in hiesiger Gegend, in
ärgerlicher und läppischer Verkleidung umherzögen, stellten den Kasper,
Melchior und Balthasar, den Joseph, die Maria, die Hirten, Engel,
Herodes pp. vor, sangen Lieder plumper Versart, und führten in den
Häusern eine Art von Komödie auf, von der Geburt des Menschenerlösers
und anderen religiösen Gegenständen, die sie nur schändeten und
lächerlich machten, in denen sie vor der Puppe, welche die sogenannte
Maria bei sich führte, niederfielen und wunderliche Vorstellungen
machten.« Um über die schöne Art der Poesie urtheilen zu können, folgt
hier ein Pröbchen davon, so viel ich aus der Erzählung des alten Mannes
gemerkt habe:

_Marie_ singt z. B.

    Joseph mein! lieber Joseph mein!
    zünd mir an ein Feuerlein,
    und koch dem Kind ein Breyelein.

_Joseph_ antwortet:

    Maria, Maria, das will ich gerne thun,
    dieweil nun schläft der liebe Suhn;
    will ich dir machen ein Feuerlein,
    und will kochen dem Kind ein Breyelein.
    Den Brey koch ich und bück mich hart,
    darzu verbrenn ich mir den Bart. pp.

Mitleidig dacht ich bey mir, wie weit ist diese Classe von Menschen
von dem wolthuenden Lichte der Aufklärung zurück! Ich fragte nach dem
Prediger des Ortes, ob er mit diesem Unfug zufrieden sey: »o nein!«
sagte der Alte, »dieser hat zu verschiedenen Malen öffentlich diesen
Müßiggängern ihre schändliche und abgeschmackte Bettelei vorgehalten.
Unser Polizey-Aufseher, der Lehnrichter, ließ doch trotz der Rüge des
Herrn Pastors nicht blos im Dorfe --, sondern sogar zu verschiedenen
Malen dieses Gaukelspiel bei sich -- in seinem Zechenhause
aufführen --!«

Mit einem nochmaligen Händedruck und einem Seufzer über seines Ortes
Obrigkeit, schied der Mann von mir und ich verließ das Dorf mit einem
Herzen voll Mitleid. Auf meiner Rückreise nahm ich den Weg wieder durch
Thalheim und erkundigte mich noch einmal nach diesem Gesindel, ob es
noch immer ihre erbauliche Arlequinade so unverschämt, unter den Augen
eines hochlöblichen Amts fortspielen dürfe[14]. Aber leider: nicht ein
heiliger Weihnachtsabend -- nicht der 1. Feiertag -- kein Sonnabend
noch Sonntag ist verschont worden. Das Schauspiel hatte sich vielmehr
fast auf alle hiesige benachbarte Orte verbreitet, nur Jahnsdorf und
Gornsdorf sollen sich rühmlichst ausgezeichnet haben; besonders am
ersteren Ort haben sie diese Obskuranten in Verhaft nehmen wollen.
Auch von den Einwohnern zu Thalheim bewies der größte Theil an diesem
lächerlichen Schauspiel seinen größten Mißfallen; nur Wenige nahmen an
diesem Unfug Antheil.

Dem Urtheile eines jeden Unbefangenen sey es anheimgestellt, ob
dergleichen Aufzüge, ich will nicht sagen unseren Zeiten angemessen;
sondern überhaupt einer wahren Religiosität beförderlich sind? Der
Pöbel belustigt sich freilich an dergleichen Spektakel-Scenen: aber zu
seiner sittlichen Besserung tragen sie nichts bey; sie schaden vielmehr
der Guten Sache und geben den Leichtsinnigen Gelegenheit zu Spottungen
über die Religion selbst.«

Die einzelnen Beteiligten wurden vernommen. Man ersieht aus den Akten,
daß der Hauptbeteiligte ein gewisser Unger war, der das Spiel auswendig
kannte und seinen Mitspielern diktierte. Der ganze Prozeß hat die eine
segensreiche Folge gehabt, daß das ganze Spiel zu den Akten genommen
wurde und uns auf diese Weise erhalten geblieben ist.

Es mag hier folgen:

_Kleiner Engel._

(Im weißen Hemde, an den Armen und am Körper mit rotseidenen Bändern
geschmückt, auf dem Kopfe eine Papierkrone, in der Hand ein hölzernes,
mit Silberpapier beklebtes Schwert tragend.)

    Vorsichtige Künste lieben Herren und Frauen,
    wie sie allhier versammelt seyn, zu hören und zu beschauen,
    was dies für ein Spiel mag seyn, --
    nicht Silber, Gold oder Geld
    welches liebt die ganze Welt,
    sondern das liebe Jesulein
    das wollen wir fürtragen,
    wie Herodes mit List
    gedacht nach dem Kindlein Jesus Christ,
    es zu töten.
    Wir bitten, seyn Sie feyn still,
    wir wollen agieren unser Spiel.
    ~Puer natus in Bethlehem, unde gaudet etc.~
    Drei Könige aus Saba kommen dâhar
    Gold, Weyrauch, Myrrhen brachten sie dar.
    Alleluja:

            (gehet ab).

_Joseph_ (im grauen Rock, mit Schurzfell angetan, einen Zimmermann
darstellend, eigentümlich hustend) kommt zum Wirt:

    Ach, gutes Glück mein,
    wir möchten gern beherbergt seyn.

_Wirt_:

    Ey was -- für solche schlechte Nation --
    geht ihr von mir, packt euch davon,
    ihr seht mir aus für solche Gäst
    die ihr selbst nicht viel habt zum Best,
    ich schaff mir solche Vögel an,
    die ich tapfer rupfen kann
    auf das ich eins für zwey kann schreiben
    damit ich auch ein Wirt mag bleiben.

_Joseph_:

    Ach, lieber Herr, behalt uns heut,
    wir sind zwar arm, doch ehrliche Leut.

_Wirt_:

    Es ist weder Platz noch Raum allhier,
    ich kann euch geben kein Quartier.
    Wollt ihr aber damit zufrieden seyn,
    so gehet in diesen Stall hinein.
    Da liegt ein wenig Stroh und Heu,
    auf daß mirs nicht zu weit ausstreuh!

_Maria_:

    Ist das Plätzchen noch so klein,
    so wollen wir damit zufrieden seyn.

_Der 1. König._

    Ich will mich einmal sehen um,
    wie das Gestirne läuft herum,
    das ich wahrhaftig schreiben kann,
    was sich das Jahr hat zugetran --
    Man sagt, es sey ein neuer König geboren,
    dieser König ist gewiß geboren schon
    ach! schön bist du und glänzest hell --
    Glück zu, ihr drey weisen Gesell!

_Der 1. Schäfer_ (im weißen Gewand in gelben Hosen, runder Mütze, wie
ein Schachthut geformt, die mit Goldpapier besetzt war und mit einem
grünen Stab in der Hand):

    Wir armen Schäfersleut sind wohl hier auf Erden
    von der geringsten Art, die kaum genannt mag werden.
    Im Sommer über liegen wir wohl auf dem freyen Feld.
    Haben wenig Brot und auch dazu kein Heller Geld,
    im Winter aber müssen wir viel Kält und Frost ausstehen,
    und dürfen überdies noch keine Nacht zu Bette gehen.
    Der Wolf schleicht um die Schafe bald nieder bald auf
    drum heißt es, ihr Schäfersleut, habt fleißig Acht darauf!

_Der 2. Schäfer._

    Ich lasse nicht alle Hoffnung schwinden,
    dieweil wir nun von unsern Sünden
    so Gott es will durch wahre Buß bekehren
    so wird er uns viel Guts bescheren.
    Halt an, halt an, was hör ich klingen
    und fröhlich in den Lüften singen?
    Dies ist das liebe Engelein,
    dies, dies wird der rechte Bote seyn.

_Der 1. Schäfer._

    Auf, auf Gespann, die Nacht ist schon vergangen,
    wir wolln mit Freuden wieder einen neuen Tag anfangen,
    dieweil wir nun die Pflicht der Ruh genossen,
    so wolln wir säumen nicht, doch längst schon unverdrossen
    des Höchsten Ruhm erhebe sich
    mit Danken und mit Beten.
    Allein, was seh doch,
    die dort herzu uns treten?
    Weil dann die Furcht mit Schrecken gar kein Ende nimmt,
    schaut her, der helle Glanz, der jetzt herzu uns kimmt.

_Der kleine Engel._

    Hört ihr Hirten, fürcht euch nicht,
    eine große Freud, die ich euch bericht
    denn euch ist heut der Heiland geboren
    welcher ist Christus auserkoren.

_Der 1. Schäfer._

    Nun hört doch, ihr lieben Gespann mein,
    zu uns Hirten ist kommen ein Engelein.
    Hat uns verkündet von einem schönen Kindelein
    welches liegt in einem Krippelein,
    dies, dies soll der Heiland seyn.

_Der 2. Schäfer._

    Nun, wohlan, so laßt uns gahn,
    um diese Dinge recht erfahren,
    dieweil uns Gott der Herr hat solches kund gethan,
    unser Vieh wird er indessen wohl bewahren.

_Alle drei Schäfer singen_:

    Nun laßt uns gehen zum Krippelein,
    beschaun wie diese Geschichte sey,
    denn weil so viel tausend Engelein
    singen von dem schönen Kindelein.

_Der 1. König._

    Ich, König Kaspar aus Hustiz,
    ich besitze zwar großen Verstand und Witz,
    wie das ich aber seh gewiß,
    daß der Stern erschienen is (t).

_Der 2. König._

    Ich, König Melchor aus Griechewitz,
    ich besitze zwar großen Verstand und Witz
    wie das ich aber seh gewiß,
    daß der Stern erschienen is.

_Der Mohrenkönig_ (grüne Jacke, rotes mit Goldpapier besetztes
Schurzfell, einen Degen an der Seite und eine Krone auf dem Haupt):

    Ich bin der Schwarze aus Mohrenland,
    ich, König Palzar aus Orient werd ich genannt,
    ich sags euch frey nach meinem schlechten Verstand gewiß,
    daß der Stern erschienen is.

_Der 4. Schäfer._

    Ihr Brüder, haben wir auch dem Kindlein etwas mitzubringen?


_Der 3. Schäfer._

    Ach, ich wüßte nichts von unserm armen Hirtenleben,
    daß wir dem Kindlein könnten geben,
    doch wolln wir singen ein schönes Liedelein
    zu Ehren dem schönen Kindelein.

_Alle Schäfer singen_:

    ~In dulci jubilo~, nun singet und seid froh
    unsers Herzens Wonne liegt in ~praesepio~ etc.

_Der 1. Schäfer._

    Nimm an, du schönes Kindelein
    von uns das schöne Liedelein
    das wir jetzt gesungen haben
    du wollest uns nicht unbelohnet haben.

_Der 2. Schäfer._

    Ach mein herzliebes Jesulein,
    mach dir ein so neues Bettelein,
    zu ruhn (in) meines Herzensschrein,
    das ich nimmermehr vergesse dein.

_Der 1. Schäfer._

    Da liegst du, o schönes Kindelein,
    das aller Welt soll Heiland seyn.

_Der 2. Schäfer._

    Ist das nicht eine wunderbare Sache,
    daß man den Heyland so schlecht und geringe achte.

_Alle Schäfer singend ab_:

    Nun wir gehen von deiner Krippen etc.

_Der 2. König._

    Lasset uns den Herodes fragen,
    daß er uns tät diese Geschichte sagen.

_Die drei Könige singen_:

    Jacob Stern, du Licht der Erden etc.

_Der Mohrenkönig_ kommt zum König Herodes:

    Glück und Sieg nach stetem Frieden
    Sey mir der König aus Judäa.

_König Herodes._

    Meinen untertänigsten Dank sagt man den Herrn frey,
    sie sind mir aber willkommen die Herren alle drey,
    sie sollen mir aber Bescheid thun, wer sie seyn --
    denn ihre Gestalt ist fremd, desto wichtiger muß ihre Sache seyn.

_Der Mohrenkönig._

    König Herodes, wir sind in seiner Gewalt,
    und demütigen uns für seiner Gestalt,
    was aber unsere Verrichtung sey,
    wir wolln fragen, wo der neugeborene König der Juden sey.
    Denn, wir haben seinen Stern gesehen im Morgenland, weit von fern,
    und sind deswegen kommen an,
    daß liebe Kind zu beten an.

_König Herodes._

    Hu! ich weiß von keinem König nichts,
    ich bin der König und kein andrer nicht.
    Wäre mir ein neuer König geboren,
    wäre mein ganzes Königreich verloren.
    Ich will mir aber bald lassen fordern her
    einen Schriftgelehrten, dieser soll ratschlagen
    wo und in welcher Stadt zu finden ist ein solches Kind.
    Hallo! mein Diener Laban, fordre mir alsbald einen Schriftgelehrten!

_Der Kriegsknecht._

    Ganz gehorsam, ihre König Majestät.

    (geht nach einem Winkel wo der Schriftgelehrte steht)

    Der Schriftgelehrte soll alsbald zu Königs Majestät kommen!

_Schriftgelehrter_ (mit einer großen Brille nebst einem Buch, die Bibel
vorstellend, die er hin und her wirft, schwarz gekleidet):

    O wey, o wey, wie geschieht mir --
    ist etwas beim königlichen Hof vorgegangen?

_Kriegsknecht_:

    Unfehlbar.

_Schriftgelehrter_ (kommt zu Herodes).

    Ey Schalom, ey Schalom, mein lieber Herr König,
    was ist ihr Bitten und Begehr,
    daß sie mich haben lassen fordern hierher?

_König Herodes._

    Hör, ein groß Wunder kommt mir für Ohren,
    welches mir ist, ein neuer König geboren,
    dieweil allda sind zur Hand
    drei Könige aus dem Mohrenland.
    Die fragen mich ohne alle Scheu,
    wo der neugeborene König der Juden sey.
    Drum sag und bericht in der That,
    wo und welcher Stadt
    zu finden ist ein solches Kind.

_Schriftgelehrter_:

    Soviel ich weiß und befindlich ist,
    so schreibt der Prophet Micho
    im V. seiner Kapitel also:
    und du Bethlehem in Ephrata
    die du klein bist unter den Tausenden in Juda
    aus dir soll mir der kommen,
    der über mein Volk ein Herr sey, ein Herr sey.

_König Herodes._

    Nun hört, ihr großen Herrn insgemein --
    ihr sollt mir aber Bescheid tun, wo euch der Stern erschienen ist.

_Der 1. König._

    Wo uns der Stern erschienen ist,
    das sagen wir zu dieser Frist,
    er ist uns erschienen im Morgenland,
    drum haben wir uns gemacht auf den Weg bald.

_König Herodes._

    Nun hört doch, ihr großen Herren insgemein,
    ziehet nun hin nach Bethlehem fein;
    und sucht fleißig bis daß ihrs find,
    und wenn ihrs dann gefunden habt,
    so kommt wieder her in diese Stadt,
    und bericht mich auch fein geschwind,
    daß ich auch komme und anbete das liebe Kind
    und große Schätze gebe fein
    und mit mir nehme aufs Schloß herein;
    ich wollte wünschen, sie kämen glücklich an den Ort.

_Der 2. König._

    So wir das liebe Kind werden treffen an,
    so wolln wir ihre König Majestät kund und zu wissen thun.

_Die drei Könige singen_:

    Kein Herodes kann uns sagen,
    Wo sein Thron ist aufgestellt etc. --

    (Sie kommen zu Joseph und fallen vor der Krippe nieder.)

_Der 1. König._

    Nimm hin arabisch Gold
    und sei dabei uns Heyden hold.

_Der 2. König._

    Nimm hin den Weihrauch aus meiner Hand
    den schreib ich dir zum Unterpfand.

_Der Mohrenkönig._

    Da will ich dir die Myrrhe verehren
    daß du uns wirst viel Freude bescheren.

_Joseph._

    Habt Dank ihr Herren alle drey _(hustet bei einem jeden Wort
      auf sonderbarer Art.)_

_Der 1. König._

    Führ uns in den Himmel ein --

_Maria_ singt:

    Joseph, lieber Joseph mein, zünd mir an ein Feuerlein,
    Koch dem Kind ein Breielein.

_Joseph._

    Maria, Maria, das will ich gerne thun,
    dieweil nun schläft dein lieber Suhn,
    will ich dir machen ein Feuerlein
    und will kochen dem Kind ein Breilein,
    Den Brei koch ich und bück mich hart,
    dabei verbrenn ich mir den Bart.
    Jetzt kommt die kalte Winterszeit,
    so beschwerlich über uns arme Leut,
    daß ich faßt so erfroren bin,
    so dauert mich das liebe Kind.

_Der 1. König._

    Ich bin müd und abgematt',
    die Abendzeit uns überschatt',
    wir wolln ein wenig schlummern ein,
    Gott, Gott wird unser Hüter sein.

_Der 2. König._

    So ruht ihr abgematten Glieder und genießt der süßen Ruh,
    legt euch ohne Sorgen nieder, Gottes Güte deckt euch zu.

_Der Mohrenkönig._

    Mein Herz sehnt sich nach seiner Ruhe!

_Der kleine Engel._

    Hört ihr drei Weisen aus Morgenland
    von Gott bin ich zu Euch gesandt,
    daß ihr euch sollt von dem Weg ablenken
    und nicht wieder nach Herodes lenken,
    denn weil Herodes eitel falsche List
    erdacht wider den Herrn Jesum Christ.

_Der Mohrenkönig._

    Auf, auf ihr großen Könige mit mir
    ein Engel im Traum erscheinet mir,
    daß wir sollen von dem Weg ablenken
    und nicht wieder nach Herodes lenken,
    denn weil Herodes eitel falsche List
    erdacht wider den Herrn Jesus Christ.

_Die Könige_ singen und gehen alsbald ab:

    Deine Krippen glänzen hell etc.

_Der kleine Engel_ kommt zu Joseph:

    Joseph, mein lieber Joseph mein,
    steh auf und nimm das Kindelein
    und seine Mutter bey der Hand
    und flieh mit ihr nach Egyptenland,
    und bleib allda bis ich sage dir --
    denn es ist Gefahr vorhanden hier
    denn weil Herodes das Kindlein sucht,
    denn weil er uns umbringen tut --

_Joseph._

    Maria, Maria steh auf und nimm das Kindlein
    daß wirs bringen aus der Gefahr,
    dieweil es Herodes beschlossen gar
    das Kindlein umzubringen zur Hand,
    so wolln wir wieder ziehen nach Egyptenland.

_König Herodes._

    O weicht! o weicht! alles Unglück auf mich herabbricht,
    und da ich saß auf meinem Thron
    ein süßer Schlaf der kam mir án (on)
    kaum tat ich meine Augen zu
    da kam ein Löw in meine Ruh
    und stürzte mich in meinem Tron
    und riß die Kron von meinem Haupt herab.
    Mein ganz Gemüte in mir ergrimmt,
    daß mir faßt das Herz im Leib zerspringt;
    dieweil ich nunmehr sehe an
    daß mich die Weisen betrogen han.
    Auf Kriegsknecht! rüste dich
    hau und brenne, tödt und stich
    und laß dein Schwert den Kindern blutig wetzen
    und thu mir nicht ein einzigs auf die Seite setzen!
    Wirst du das thun --
    so wird meine Krone auf festem Grunde ruhn!

_Kriegsknecht._

    Ganz gehorsam, ihr Könige Majestät --
    was sie mir anbefohlen haben, soll alsbald ins Werk gerichtet
      werden.
    Denn weil er mirs hat anbefohlen, so will ich auch kein
      Kind verschonen.
    Ei! so will ich hinaus, will ziehen meinen Säbel heraus,
    will durchgehn durch das ganze jüdische Land
    will alle Knaben von 1, 2 bis Jahren.
    Was drunter ist soll keins am Leben bleiben,
    und wenn die Eltern täten Blut weinen.

_Die ganze Schaar_, 13 an der Zahl, singen:

    Wenn wir in höchsten Nöten seyn
    und wissen nicht, wo aus noch ein etc.

_Kriegsknecht._

    Ei, ei, wie hat mein Schwert geschnitten,
    es half kein Flehen, es half kein Bitten,
    viel tausend Mann hab ich erschlagen --
    trotz dem, der mir ein Wort kann sagen!
    Die kleinen Kinder schrien erbärmlich,
    bei mir aber war ganz und gar kein Verschonen nich[t],
    nun hab ich abermals ihre Könige Majestät Willen vollbracht,
    daß sie nicht Ursache haben über mich zu klagen
    ich bin so tyrannisch mit ihn[en] umgegangen,
    es ist mir gewesen, als wenn [ich] nichts hab ermachen können!
      [als wenn ichs nicht hätt machen können!]

_König Herodes._

    Recht, so, nichts daran gelogen --
    List muß wieder mit List belohnt werden.
    Der Anfang ist gemacht, wer mir wird widerstehen,
    der soll alsbald mit Schrecken untergehen,
    allein die Juden mögen mich lassen,
    sie müssen doch in Furcht die Macht sich dämpfen lassen.
    Mein Mut und Kampf ist mir von Jugend auf erhitzet und läßt
      auch noch nicht nach.
    Mein ist der Ruhm, mein ist die Ehr,
    nun fürcht sich kein Herodes mehr!

    _Gesang_: Wunderkind wie deine Kinder etc.

_Der größere Engel._

    Nun hört ihr großen Herren und Frauen insgemein,
    wir bedanken uns auch alle fein
    für das Geschenk, das sie uns verehrt haben.
    Dafür wünschen wir ein glückliches neues Jahr!
    Und sollten wir noch gesund seyn,
    so kommen wir nächstes Jahr wieder rein.
    Ich wollte wünschen wir möchten einander mit Freude willkommen seyn.

    _Gesang_: Heut schleußt er wieder auf die Thür.
      [8. Vers von Lobt Gott ihr Christen etc.]

Die ganze Verhandlung läßt erkennen, daß jedenfalls der Ortsgeistliche
der Urheber des Schriftstückes gewesen ist. Der Lehnrichter Siegel
hatte die Aufführung in seinem Saale verboten, da ging man kurzerhand
ins Zechenhaus. Dies untersagte das Bergamt zu Geyer. Das Konsistorium
in Dresden ließ die Sache bis zum Kurfürsten[15] gelangen, aus dessen
Kabinett ein Befehl an den Amtmann zu Stollberg erging, die Uebeltäter
zu bestrafen und zwar mit 2 Tagen Gefängnis und Tragung der nicht
unerheblichen Kosten. Das Amt zu Stollberg verfügte demgemäß. Man
versteht heutzutage die Maßnahmen der Geistlichen kaum, denn dem hohen
Konsistorium zu liebe, wurde schließlich doch das Urteil gefällt.
Es zeigt von einer Beschränktheit und Volksfremdheit, die durchaus
nicht etwa die Stimmung der Bevölkerung im kirchenfreundlichen Sinne
beeinflußte. Spieler und Hörer glaubten bei der Ausübung der alten
Sitte ein christliches Werk zu tun. Der Vorwurf, die heilige Geschichte
lächerlich gemacht zu haben, lehnten sie entschieden ab.

Das _Thalheimer Spiel_ ist jedenfalls weitverbreitet gewesen. Der
Bergmann Unger will es auch in Breitenbrunn mitgespielt haben.


Das Schwarzenberger Spiel.

In der Wissenschaftlichen Beilage der Leipziger Zeitung vom 23.
Dezember 1902 berichtet Karl Freyboth über ein »Heilige drey König
Spiehl«, welches ihm in einer Niederschrift vom 15. Februar 1805
vorlag. Ein Johann August Hermann in Raschau hat es aufgeschrieben. Es
wurde auch in Schwarzenberg und Grünhain aufgeführt und ähnelt fast
vollständig dem vorher mitgeteilten Thalheimer Spiel. Die Bruchstücke
lassen aber erkennen, daß die Königs- und Hirtenszenen besser geordnet
sind, wie dies auch im Wiesenthaler Spiel der Fall ist. Der Epilog, vom
Engel gesprochen, weicht auch vom Thalheimer Spiel ab:

    Ihr geehrten Herren und Frauen insgemein,
    was ein Anfang hat, muß auch ein Ende sein.
    Sie habens doch vernommen zwar,
    wie es zuging mit der Christenschar.
    Gott sandte doch ein Engelein,
    zu behüten das liebe Jesulein,
    dieweil Herodes eine falsche List
    erdacht hat wider den Herrn Jesus Christ.

Er entschuldigt die arme Handlung, die armseligen Verse, die
mangelhaften Reime. Zum Abschied spricht er:

    Sollt aber ein Fehler vorgegangen sein,
    ein andermal wolln wir es bringen ein.
    Wenn wir werden wieder einmal anlangen,
    so wollen wir wünschen, wir werden einander mit Freuden empfangen.

Den Schluß bildet der Vers: »Heut schleußt er wieder auf die Tür.«


Das Löwenhainer Spiel.

Ein ganz hervorragendes Spiel teilt E. Giersner, Dresden, im 5. Heft
des 2. Bandes der Mitteilungen des Vereins für Sächsische Volkskunde
mit. Das Original befindet sich in den Händen des Herrn Zimmerhäckel in
Löwenhain und trägt die Aufschrift »Johann Gottlieb Streller, Löwenhain
1823.« Giersner hat sich das schwer lesbare Manuskript von einem damals
noch lebenden Sohne des Streller ergänzen lassen. Es unterscheidet
sich in verschiedenen Punkten von den anderen erzgebirgischen Spielen,
so fehlt z. B. die Herbergsszene. Auch ist eine komische Figur, der
Gardeson, eingefügt, der wohl dem Hofnarren entspricht. Es ist außerdem
ausschließlich ein Königspiel. Seine Verwandtschaft mit dem Thalheimer
Spiel kann es nicht verleugnen. Man sehe sich die Hirtenszenen in
beiden Spielen darauf an. Das Spiel mag hier folgen:

Der _Sternträger_ fängt an zu singen:

    Wie schön leucht uns der Weisen Stern,
    der uns entspringt von Gott dem Herrn
    und unsre Herzen rühret,
    das wir uns machen auf die Bahn,
    zu bethen Jesum Christum an,
    allda er uns hinführet.
    Drum so -- seid froh;
    walt ihr Heiden, -- ruft mit Freuden -- auserkohren;
    Christus ist uns heute gebohren.

_Der Engel_ spricht:

    So sei gegrüßet dieses Haus
    und alle, die da gehen ein und aus;
    wir wünschen euch zum neuen Jahr
    Friede, Heil, Gesundheit immerdar;
    der Segen Gottes sei mit euch
    bis ihr gelangt ins Himmelreich
    und singt mit allen Engeln froh
    ewig ein holdes Jubilo.

_Urbian_, der 1. Hirte, spricht:

    Ach Bruder Dulcian, wie schuttert mir mein Herz!
    Ich weiß nicht wie mir ist, vor Furcht und großen Schmertz,
    weil sich ein starker Glanz erstreckt vor mein Gesicht:
    Ach Bruder, bleib bei mir, ach, ach, verlaß mich nicht!

_Dulcian_, der 2. Hirte, spricht:

    Ach Bruder Urbian, ich bin nebst Dir erschruken
    hier über diesen Schein, der uns bey finstrer Nacht
    so helleuchtent überstrallt als brenden alle Rocken:
    Vor Großer Furcht und grauß mein Herz im Leibe kracht.

_Der Engel_ bei die Hirten hin und spricht:

    Ihr lieben Hirten, fürcht euch nicht!
    Ich bin vor euer Angesicht
    vom Himmel ab hieher gesand,
    soll machen euch bekannt
    die Freude, die Gott euch göntt
    von seinen eingebornen Kind,
    der aller Welt ein Heiland ist;
    des freuet euch zu dieser Frist.
    Hierauf nun geht gen Bethlehem
    -- die Schaaf in diesen Schutz ich nehm --,
    da werdt ihr finden das Kindelein
    in Windeln eingewickelt ein;
    es liegt in einer Krippen dar --
    auf, auf und nehmet meiner wahr.
    ~Gloria in excelsis deo. Etampherava. Homenetus fotumta Poro.~

Nun singen sie _alle_ mit die Engel:

    Allein Gott in der Höh sey Ehr.

Der große Hirte _Urbian_ spricht:

    Nun wollen wir gehen gen Bethlehem
    und diese Dinge erfahren

Der kleine Hirte _Dulcian_ spricht:

    Die uns der Engel hat kuntgetan;
    die Schaaf wird er indessen uns wohl bewahren.

Nun kommen die Hirten allebeite gesungen:

    Vom Himmel kam der Engel Schaar,
    erschien uns Hirten offenbar,
    sie sagten uns ein Kindlein zart,
    das liegt dort in der Krippen hart.

Sie bethen es mit den Worten an:

    O, Jesu, liebes Herrlein mein!
    Komm zu mir in mein Herz hinnein;
    nim es ein zur Wohnung dein,
    so werd ich rein und Selig sein.

Nun gehen sie wieder zurück und singen:

    Lob, Ehr sei Gott im höchsten Thron,
    der uns schenkt seinen einigen Sohn;
    des freuet sich der Engel Schaar
    und singt ein solch Neues Jahr.

Die nun folgende Szene zwischen Gardeson, Laban und Herodes findet sich
unserem Schlußspiel. Ebenso ein großer Teil des Königsspiels. Nachdem
sich die Könige entschlossen haben, zum Kinde zu ziehen, fährt das
Löwenhainer Spiel fort.

Die 3 Könige gehen 3 mal hintereinander rum, nach dem mit einem
Compliment zum Könige Herodes hin. -- Nach diesen fängt der 1. König an:

    Der Segen des Höchsten wolle begnaden,
    ihro Königreich schützen vor Schaden,
    vor einfal der Feinde, vor Feuer und Tod:
    Sie leben befreit vor Jammer und Noth.

Der König _Herodes_ spricht:

    Ich danke euch von Herzen
    vor dieses Compliment;
    ihr werdet ohne scherzen
    mir zeigen an behend:
    Was ist euer beginnen,
    wo ist es hingericht? --
    Eröffnet euer Sinnen
    und gebet mir bericht!

Der König:

    Ihro König Herodes, verzeihen sie mir
    zu reden frei die Wahrheit hier!
    Warum wir ausgezogen sein,
    das macht ein Sternenschein;
    weil er uns neu erschienen ist
    und er zeigt an zu dieser Frist,
    es sei Jesus, das Heil, gebohren,
    zum Juden König auserkohren;
    denselben wollen wir beten an,
    sie wollen den Ort uns zeigen lan.

_Der König Herodes_:

    Ich hab hiervon gar keinen Grund
    zu sagen euch in dieser Stund;
    doch wil ich kundschaft legen aus,
    wo sei zu finden dieses Hauß;
    Stelt euch bei mir bald wieder ein,
    indes thut Gott befohlen sein.

            Die Könige gehen ab.

Der _König Herodes_ spricht:

    Mein Kammerdiener kom herbei!

_Der Kammerdiener_:

    Sie befehlen nur, ich diene treu.

_Der König Herodes._

    Hol die Schriftgelehrten vor uns her
    das ist mein ernster Wille und Begehr.

Der _Kammerdiener_ zu den Schriftgelehrten:

    Sie sollen gleich vor den König Herodes erscheinen.

Der _Gardeson_ zu den König Herodes spricht:

    Herr König, hab ichs nicht gesagt,
    das sich Kundschafter ham hergewagt?

_Der König Herodes_:

    Nur stille, lieber Gardeson!
    Wir wollen sie lassen laufen an.

Der _Schriftgelehrte_ zu den König Herodes spricht:

    Auf ihr Königlich will und Wort
    erschein ich jetzt an diesen ort.

Der _König Herodes_ zu den Schriftgelehrten:

    Hiervon zeige mir geschwind:
    wo findet man ein solches Kind,
    das da der Jüden König sei,
    Wie solches reden die Weisen drey?

Der _Schriftgelehrte_ mit einem Buche:

    Hiervon mus ich wohl zeigen an,
    was uns der Prophet Micha kundgethan:
    Zu Bethlehem in Davids Stadt
    -- dieselbe er benennet hat --
    sol herfürsprisen der Herr Christ
    der unser Heil und König ist:

    »Und du Bethlehem im Jüdischen lande bist mit nichten die
    kleinste unter den Fürsten Juda, denn aus dier soll mir kommen
    der Herzog, der über mein Volk Israel Herr sei.«

            Schlägt das Buch zu.

_Gardeson_:

    Herr König, das Ding lauft auf einen Krieg hinaus!
    Da werde ich schauen zum Fenster hinaus!
    Ich menge mich fürwahr nicht drein,
    ich trinke lieber Bier und Brandenwein.

_Herodes_ spricht:

    Mein Kammerdiener, komm herfür,
    bestell die Weisen her zu mir.

_Kammerdiener_:

    Auf ihr Königlich pefehl und Ortinand
    geh ich gleich hin und mach ihn bekand.


_Kammerdiener_ (zu den Weisen hin):

    Ihr Herren Weisen, ich mach euch bekand,
    ich bring euch eine Ortinand
    von meinen König Herodes her:
    Ihr solt gleich vor ihn erscheinen ist sein begehr.

Die drei Könige vor Herodes:

_Der 1. König_:

    Aus gehorsamster Schuldigkeit --

_Der 2. König_:

    Erscheinen wir zu dieser Zeit --

_Der 3. König_:

    Und sind zu dienen stets bereit.

_Herodes_:

    So ziehet hin nach Bethlehem,
    Weil nicht hier zu Jerusalem,
    Sondern von solcher kleinen Stadt
    Micha vorlängst geschrieben hat,
    Das daselbst sol kommen herfür
    Der Herzog, welchen suchet ihr,
    Und wie ihr solchen treffet an,
    So solt ihr mich es wisen lan:
    Ich wil ihn auch Verehrung thun,
    So geth in Gottes Nahmen nun.

_Der 1. König_:

    Wir danken vor die gütigkeit --

_Der 2. König_:

    Und sind zu dienen stets bereit; --

_Der 3. König_:

    Sie leben wohl zu allerzeit.

_Der Gardeson_:

    Das das mögen wohl rechte narren sein --
    Ich kann mir es fürwar nicht anders bilden ein:
    Das ein klein Kind von Bethlehem
    Soll herrschen zu Jerusalem --
    Mein Herr giebt das gar schwerlich zu!
    Es wird sonst da werden die gröste unruh.

_Der 1. König_:

    Ihr lieben Herrn, seth doch an!
    Der Stern zeigt uns noch mehr die ban
    Zu dieses Prinzeß Residenz:
    Wir sind gewiß bald an die Grenz.

_Der 2. König_:

    Ich seh den Stern ganz stille stehn;
    Ein jeder mag es selbst ansehn:
    Er stralet auf ein Haußlein dort,
    Gewis ist dies des Prinzens ort.

_Der 3. König_:

    So wollen wir alda kören ein,
    Wo uns hinfirt der Sternenschein.

Der 1. König giebt das geschenke ab und spricht:

    Dies sei, Heiland, Dir verörth
    Aniezt aus Herzensgrunde:
    Arabisches Gold, Weirauch und Mirren.
    Ich glaubs zu dieser Stunde,
    Das du bist wahrer Gott und wahrer Mensch zugleich,
    So nimm mich endlich doch zu dir ins ewige reich!

_Der 2. König_:

    Du bist, o Jesulein
    Ein König hochgebohren;
    Dein Vater ist mein Gott,
    Der hat Dich auserkoren:
    So nim von mir doch an,
    Was ich aus Schwachheit dir aniezo bringen kan.

_Der 3. König._

    Nim hin von mir, du helt
    Aus Davids Stamm entsprossen,
    Was ich Dir bringe mit.
    Las mich auch einst geniesen,
    Einst sein in deinen Reich, das dir bereitet ist,
    Bis ich beschliß meine lebensfrist.[16]

_Der Joseph_:

    Habt Grosen Dank, meine lieben Herrn!
    Gott wird euch davor viel bescherrn
    Und machen an der Seelle reich,
    Ja gar den lieben Engeln gleich.

Die 3 Könige gehen ab, und der Engel geth hin und spricht zu den
Königen:

    Ihr Herrn Weisen, ich mach euch bekand;
    Nehmt einen andern Weg in euer Land!
    Geth nicht wieder zu Herodes hin,
    Den er ist falsch in seinen Sinn;
    Ihr werdet sonst kommen in gefahr.
    Dies zeig ich euch; nehmt meiner wahr!

_Die Mutter Maria_:

    Schlaf ein, mein liebes Kindelein,
    Und thu dein Aeuglein zu:
    Der liebe Gott, der wil dein Vater sein,
    :,: Drum schlaf in guter Ruh! :,:

_Der Joseph spricht_:

    Ich bin sehr müth, ich armer Mann,
    Weil ich heut sehr viel Arbeit hab gethan;
    Und da ich nun bin kommen zu Hauß,
    Wold ich gern wieder ruhen aus!
    So mus ich erstlich nehmen her
    Den Milchtopf, Mehl und Quirl schwer
    Zu kochen meinen Kinde einen Brei --
    Ist das nicht eine schöne Köcherei?
    Und weil ich sehr erschroken bin,
    Hab ich nichts in meinen tüpfel drin.

Der _Engel_ zu Joseph und spricht:

    Auf, auf, Joseph, und säum dich nicht,
    Weil ietzt vorgeth ein schwer gericht.
    Herodes wüthet wie ein Hund:
    Er will ausrotten diese Stundt
    Die Kinder so in Unschuld sein --
    Es soll auch treffen dein Kindelein.
    Drum zeigt dir Gott den unterricht,
    Drum auf, Joseph, und säume nicht!

_Joseph_ spricht zu Maria:

    Maria, mein vertrautes Weib,
    Hör an was mir Gott anzeigt!
    Steh auf, begleite deinen Leib,
    Ein Groß Unglück sich erreigt:
    Herodes will, die Kindelein
    Alsbald müssen getötet sein.
    Auf, auf! Hier ist kein Bleibens mehr,
    Der Engel Schutz ist um uns her.

_Maria_ steth auf und spricht:

    Weil uns Gott dies zeiget an,
    Das wir uns machen auf die bahn,
    So wollen wir fliehen in Egiptenland!
    Gott wird uns schon leisten sein Beistand,
    Das wir alda sicher sein
    Mit unsern lieben Kindelein.

Der eine Hirte stößt in das Horn und die ganze Cumun fängt an zu singen:

    Die Hirten auf den Felde warn,
    Erfahren neue Mähre
    Von der Englischen Schaar,
    Das Christus geboren wäre,
    Ein König über alle Könige Groß;
    Herodes die rede gar sehr verdroß,
    Aussand er seine Bothen.
    Ey wie gar eine falsche list
    Ertacht er wieder an Jesum Christ!
    Die Kindelein lies er töden.

_Der König Herodes_ spricht ganz traurich:

    Gardeson, gieb guten Rath!
    Ich mögt vor angst fliehen aus der Stadt,
    Da ichs verstehe und sehs auch an,
    Das mich die Weisen betrogen han!
    Was üben wir vor eine that? --
    Gardeson gieb guten Rath!

_Der Gardeson_ antwordet edwas zornig:

    Herr König, hab ichs nicht gesagt,
    Ihr solt mich lasen unbefragt,
    Da ich nun klärlich zeigte an,
    Es wären Kundschafter auf der ban?
    Ihr glaubt mir aber nicht!
    Machts, wie ihr wold, ist mein bericht!

_Herodes_ Andwordet ganz zornig:

    Nicht, nicht so trotzig, Gardeson!
    Ich mus doch gleich wohl hören an,
    Was fremde Leute bringen für,
    Die sich erzeigen gegen mir
    Mit aller Ehr und Höflichkeit!
    Ich will bald enden diesen Streitt. --
    Mein Kammerdiener geh geschwind
    Und nimm zu dir das Kriegsgesind,
    Geh hin nach Bethlehem ins Jüdische land,
    Würg alle Kinder vor der Hand,
    Die du allso findest klein,
    Die zwey Jahr und trunter sein.

_Der Kammerdiener_ spricht und zieth den Säbel geth naus ins Haus:

    Herr König, ich bin schon bereit
    Zu ziehen aus in solchen Streitt;
    Nur Geld zur reis, es geth nun fort,
    Das ich beschlis das Königswort.

_Der Gardeson_:

    Mein Herr rasst und ist nicht klug!
    Ich sagts ihn vorhin gut genung:
    Was vermögens die kleinen Kindelein,
    Die ietzunt so erbärmlich schrein!
    Die drey kundschafter werden lange
    Mit ihren Prinzen sein gegangen,
    Einen andern gang gesuchet ham nach ihren Land!
    Die Thorheit nimt gar überhand.
    Drum lustig, wer kan lustig sein,
    Wen gleich die kleinen kinder schrein!
    Das Unglück ist auf meinem Herrn,
    Mich wird es gar nicht sehr beschwerrn!

_Der Kammerdiener_ tritt wieder rein, bei die Stubenthüre, nimmt den
Degen ab und spricht:

    Von Betlehem kom ich zu Hauß
    Und hab meine Sache recht gerichtet aus:
    Viele tausend Man hab ich erschlagen
    Truz dem, der mir ein Wort kan sagen.
    Die Kinder schrieen Jämmerlich,
    Bey mir war keine Verschonung nicht. --
    Herr König, der will ist vollbracht:
    Sie geben der furcht gute nacht!

_Herodes_ steth auf von den Stuhle:

    Victoria! ruf ich izt aus,
    So steht in Ruh mein Königshauß
    Nebst diesen ganzen land!
    Niemand kan mir thun widerstand
    Ich bin ein Herr von großer macht,
    Des rühm ich mich gar wohl betacht.

_Gardeson_:

    So truzig als mein Herr ist,
    Bin ich auch zu jeder[17] frist,
    Drum sag ich gleich wohl mit betacht:
    Leben sie alle wohl um und um zur guten Nacht!

Wen sie zur thüre nausgehen, da wird gesungen:

    So wollen wir nun Dank sagen
    Vor solche wohlthat groß,
    Die sie uns zugetragen
    Zu unsern erdeloß.
    Drum singe, wer da kan:
    Ihr Thun muß wohl gelingen,
    Bis wir mit Freuden singen:
    Was Gott thut, das ist wohl gethan!


Das Wiesenthaler Spiel.

Dieses ist 1910 von Pastor Böhme aufgezeichnet worden und wird zuerst
im »Glück auf«, Jahrgang 1910, Seite 183 ff, veröffentlicht. Im
nächsten Jahrgang (1911, Seite 39) bringt Schuldirektor O. Borges in
Leipzig einige Berichtigungen und Ergänzungen. Wir stellen die beiden
Bearbeitungen nebeneinander. Die alte Fassung (Borges) scheint die
volkstümlich wertvollere zu sein.

    _Personen_:

    Maria, Josef, Hohenpriester, Diener Laban, 3 Könige, 3
    Bediente, Wirt, Herodes, Engel, 2 Hirten.

    _Gesang_: Vom Himmel hoch.


Alte Fassung.

_Hohenpriester._

    Einen schönen guten Abend zu dieser heiligen Zeit,
    ein frohes Jahr, gesunden Leib
    Und was Ihr Herz tut mehr begehren,
    Das wünsch ich Euch, großgünstge Herrn,
    weil sich die Zeit jetzt tut herwenden,
    der Weisen Freude zu gedenken,
    so wollen wir etwas diskurieren,
    von der Geburt Jesu, unsres Herrn,
    und wie sie hat geführt der Stern.

            (Geht ab.)


Neue Fassung.

_Hohenpriester._

    Nun ist das schönste Fest auf Erden,
    Das heilge Christfest wieder da.
    Wie soll an diesem Fest der Herr gepriesen werden,
    der, als er einer Welt voll Sünder elend sah,
    vor Mitleid gegen sie so inniglich entbrannte,
    daß er -- was ihm das Teuerste und Liebste war, --
    selbst seinen Sohn, den eingebornen an sie wandte
    und ihn, -- doch wer erstaunt hier nicht sogar? --
    vom Throne seiner Herrlichkeit ins Tal der Tränen sandte,
    wo die Maria ihn gebar,
    gebar in einem finstern Stalle,
    wo nichts von Herrlichkeit an ihm zu sehen war.
    Hier lag er nun zur Rettung für uns alle,
    uns zu erretten von dem Sündenfalle,
    der leider uns die Gnade Gottes nahm.
    Ein Engel, der vom Himmel kann,
    rief: »Ich verkündige euch große Freude,
    die allem Volke widerfahren soll,
    denn heute ist der Heiland euch geboren,
    der euch das wiederbringt, was ihr verloren.«
    Freut euch, Erwachsene, auch nicht minder
    ihr guten, ihm so teuren Kinder,
    freut sämtlich euch, daß er des Himmels Paradies
    eröffnet und uns Sünder nicht verloren ließ.
    Dankt ihm vereint, verherrlicht seinen Namen
    und sucht schon früh sei Beispiel nachzuahmen!
    Nehmt seine Lehre an, die er von Gott gebracht!
    Befolgt sie gern, befolgt sie Tag und Nacht,
    so habt ihr euer Glück dann ganz gewiß gemacht,
    so seid ihr selig hier, und schließt ihr euer Leben,
    so wird der Heiland euch dort seinen Himmel geben.

            (Geht ab.)


In beiden Fassungen.

_Wirt_:

    Was gibts heut für ein Wunderspiel?
    Hab ich der Gäste doch soviel
    wie oftmals nicht? oft ist das Haus
    so leer, daß mich befällt ein Graus.
    Heut will ich mir den Beutel spicken,
    auf lange Zeit die Früchte pflücken,
    mein Haus soll mir, bei meinem Eid,
    bezahlet werden von solchen Leut.
    Ich will die Gäste gar gut traktieren,
    dabei auch doppelte Kreide führen,
    bei hohem Preis und blankem Geld,
    weil beides nur den Wirt erhält.

            (Maria und Josef kommen von rechts.)

    Doch halt, was kommt dort für ein Alter her,
    der trägt seinen Kober ganz die Quer,
    der wird gewiß wollen Herberg haben,
    eine warme Stube, die wird ihn laben.
    Er sieht so frostig um sein Maul,
    ich will hingehn, will sein nicht faul,
    will hören was sein Begehr ist.
    Woher, Alter, zu dieser Frist?

_Josef._

    Ach mein allerliebster Herr,
    ich komme gar von Weitem her,
    meiner gnädigen Herrschaft zu gehorchen.
    Ich bitt, wollt mich beherbergen bis morgen.

_Wirt._

    Ihr seht mir viel zu ärmlich aus,
    paßt heute gar nicht in mein Haus,
    ist auch kein Raum für euch mehr hier,
    sucht euch ein anderes Nachtquartier.

_Josef_ spricht zu Maria:

    Maria gieh du na, weil iech nichts richten ka.

    oder

    Maria, bitte du, weil ich nichts richten tu.


Alte Fassung.

_Maria._

    Herr Wirt, Herr Wirt, versag er uns doch nicht
    und geb er uns doch guten Bericht,
    seh er doch meinem Umstand an
    und meinen alten grauen Mann.

_Wirt._

    So gehet hinter in den Stall
    zum Ochsen und zum Esel all.
    Und was ich euch lasse tragen für,
    so kommet und bezahlet mir.

_Josef._

    Kumm, Maria, wolln wir uns ins Winkel packen,
    Gott wird schicken all unnere Sachen.

_Maria._

    Ach Josef, mein getreuer Mann,
    ich dir nicht mehr verhehlen kann:
    Ich werde nach des Herrn Wort
    ein Kind gebären in diesem Ort.

_Josef._

    Daß mir die Sach net kund mog sei,
    Maria, mit den Kindelei!
    Ich hob mich a besunne schu,
    ich war noch lafen gar drvu.

_Engel._

    Ach Josef, ändere deinen Sinn,
    weil ich von Gott gesendet bin.
    Wenn du verlassen wirst dein Weib,
    das wird dir bringen großes Leid.
    Denn was von ihr geboren ist,
    das soll heißen Jesus Christ,
    soll der ganzen Welt Erlöser werden,
    ja, allem Volk, das lebt auf Erden.


Neue Fassung.

_Maria._

    Ach Herr, verstoßt mich doch nicht,
    und gebt mir einen guten Bericht,
    weist mir ein Plätzchen im Stall an
    mit meinem alten grauen Mann.

_Wirt._

    So geht nun hinter in den Stall
    zum Ochsen und zum Esel all!
    Da sollt ihr euer Wohnung han
    mit eurem alten, grauen Mann.
    Und alles, was ich euch laß tragen für,
    so kommet und bezahlet mir.

_Josef._

    Jetzt hab ich mir das Ding bedacht,
    und das wird auch so gleich vollbracht
    Ich geh halt fort ganz in der Still,
    kann Maria machen, was sie will.

_Engel._

    Ach Josef, ändre deinen Sinn,
    weil ich von Gott gesendet bin,
    behalt Maria, dein Gemahl,
    und änder die getroffne Wahl!
    Bleib du bei ihr und liebe sie
    Gott lohnt dir alle deine Müh.


2. Auftritt.

    Die beiden Hirten um ein Lagerfeuer ruhend.


Alte Fassung.

_1. Hirt._

    B'hüt Gott, dos is a kalte Nacht,
    vor grußer Kält hob iech gewacht.
    Mei Kreiz, iech ka nimmer länger stah,
    ich will e Weile ofn Fald rimgah.

_2. Hirt._

    Ich will e Weile mittegah,
    daß ich mich erwärme ka.
    Es freist mich a su grausam hart,
    vor grußer Kält strotzt mir mei Bart.

_1. Hirt._

    Ober schau emol, mei lieber Gespa,
    wos dort of gener Weide stah,
    es gibt an glänzend hallen Schei,
    es ward wuhl gar e Gespenster sei.

_2. Hirt._

    Ich gieh net na,
    's könnt mir aans vorn Hals aga.

_1. Hirt._

    Ich gieh a net na,
    's könnt mir a aans vorn Hals aga.

_2. Hirt._

    Gimmer alle bede na,
    werds uns aans vorn Hals aga,
    schlae mir e annersch na.


Neue Fassung.

_1. Hirt._

    Mein Gott, wie kalt ist diese Nacht!
    Wie schwer wird da der Hirten Wacht!

_2. Hirt._

    Ja, lieber Freund, sie ist sehr hart.
    Vor großer Kält strotzt mir mei Bart.
    Es schauert mich, das Blut ist steif
    und fingerdick wird da der Reif.
    Doch siehe, du, mein lieber Freund!
    Was dort in jener Ferne scheint,
    das glänzt so schön, gibt hellen Schein,
    es mag wohl gar ein Gespenst sein.

_1. Hirt._

    Wahrlich mir graut vor diesem Ding.
    Wir wollen uns nicht lange besinnen,
    wollen laufen und springen.


In beiden Fassungen.

_2. Engel._

    Steht still, ihr Hirten alle zwei!
    Der Engel Gottes mit euch sei!
    Denn siehe ich verkündige euch große Freud,
    Die allem Volke widerfahren heut,
    denn euch ist heute der Heiland geboren,
    welcher ist Christus, der Herr in der Stadt Davids.

_1. Hirt._

    O horch, das ist ein Engelein,
    ein vielgeliebtes Geistelein,
    das wollen wir fragen,
    das wird uns sagen,
    das, was uns gut und dienlich sei.

_2. Hirt._

    Ich mags nicht fragen,
    laß du dirs sagen,
    was es wohl ist mit dem Gottesbericht,
    weil gar kommt ein Engelgesicht.

_1. Hirt._

    Höre du, mein liebes Engelein,
    mein vielgeliebtes Geistelein,
    erzähl mir die Geschicht,
    mit deinem Bericht
    von dem neugebornen Kindelein.

_Engel._

    Zu Bethlehem in Davids Stadt,
    wie Micha es verkündet hat,
    da liegt der Herre Jesus Christ,
    der euer aller Heiland ist.
    Er liegt in einer Krippe hart,
    neugeboren, arm und zart,
    gewickelt in die Windeln ein,
    das soll für euch das Zeichen sein.

_1. Hirt._

    Hab Dank, du liebes Engelein,
    du vielgeliebtes Geistelein!
    Wir wollen uns kurz besinnen,
    wollen laufen und springen,
    bis wir das Kindlein gefunden han,
    auf daß auch wir es beten an.

_2. Hirt._

    Sieh hier, da steht ein heller Stern,
    der zeigt gewißlich an den Herrn.

            (Josef kommt von links.)

    Wir wollen diesen Alten fragen,
    der wird uns wohl die Wahrheit sagen.


Alte Fassung.

_1. Hirt._

    Guten Abend, guten Abend, du alter Greis,
    wir bitten dich mit ganzem Fleiß,
    du wollest uns doch sehen lan
    das Kind, das uns ist kundgetan.

_Josef._

    Dort liegt es in dem Krippelein,
    gewickelt in ein Windelein.

_Hirt._

    Wie heißt es denn?

_Josef._

    Immanuel.

_Hirt._

    Was bringt es uns?

_Josef._

    Trost, Heil der Seel.
    Es ist der Weg der Glaub allein.

    _Hirt_ betet an.

_Darnach_:

    Wenn wir wieder kommen rein,
    bringen wir mit rote und gelbe Aepfelein.


Neue Fassung.

_Hirt._

    Ist, Alter, hier ein Kindelein,
    neugeboren, zart und fein,
    so zeige uns dasselbe für,
    denn uns treibt Dank und Lobgebühr.

_Josef._

    Es liegt in seiner Krippen dort,
    weil kein Raum ist an diesem Ort.

_Hirt._

    Weil wir nun das Christkind gefunden han,
    so mögen denn unsere Stimmen erklingen
    und dem Kind ein Lied zu Ehren singen.

_Die Hirten singen_:

    Gelobet seist du Jesus Christ,
    daß du Mensch geboren bist
    usw.

_Hirt._

    Wenn wir wieder komme herein,
    wollen wir mitbringen feine gelbe, rote Aepfelein.


    Hirten nach rechts ab. Der Vorhang fällt.


3. Aufzug.

    Die Weisen kommen von rechts.

_Melchior_ (sieht sich erstaunt um).

    Mein Gott, was soll mir dies bedeuten,
    daß mir der Stern jetzt tut entweichen?

_Caspar._

    Ich wünsche dem Herrn viel Glück und Fried!
    Wie kommts, daß er sich so umsieht?

_Melchior._

    Einem Stern bin ich nachgezogen,
    der hat mich bis hierher getragen,
    und als ich kam in diese Stadt,
    sogleich er sich verloren hat.

_Caspar._

    Auch mir ist dieser Stern erschienen.
    Ich komme und will dem Kindlein dienen,
    allein der Stern ist mir entschwunden,
    und hab das Kindlein nicht gefunden.

_Balthasar._

    Einen schönen guten Abend ich euch vermeldt,
    wie ist es denn mit euch bestellt,
    daß ihr allhier so stille steht
    und freundlich miteinander redt?
    Seid ihr etwa in dieser Stadt zu Haus,
    so will ich euch um etwas fragen aus.

_Melchior._

    Mein lieber Freund, sag immer an,
    ich will hören, ob man euch berichten kann.

_Balthasar._

    Ich habe einen Stern gesehen,
    wo wunderliches ist geschehen,
    der mir anzeiget fein,
    daß ein Kindlein soll geboren sein,
    soll der ganzen Welt bringen den Fried,
    soll aller Welt Erlöser werden,
    und allem Volk, das lebt auf Erden.

_Caspar._

    Gleiches ist uns auch geschehen,
    wir haben einen Stern gesehen,
    und als wir kamen zu dieser Stadt,
    sogleich er sich verloren hat.

            (Diener kommt von links.)

_Balthasar._

    Dort kommt einer von ferne her,
    der wird uns beichten von ungefähr,
    wo der neugeborene König ist,
    der geboren ist zu dieser Frist.

_Caspar._

    So wollen wir ihm entgegen gehn
    und mit ihm sprechen.


Alte Fassung.

_Balthasar._

    Einen schönen guten Abend ich euch vermeldt.
    Wie ist es denn mit euch bestellt,
    könnt ihr uns nicht anzeigen fein,
    wo der neugeborne König der Juden mag sein?
    Wir sind dem Sterne nachgezogen,
    der hat uns bis hierher getragen,
    und als wir kamen in diese Stadt,
    er sich alsbald verloren hat.


Neue Fassung.

_Balthasar._

    Könnt ihr uns etwa berichten
    von den freudigen Geschichten,
    vom neugebornen Königssohn?
    Denn es zeigte uns von ferne
    ein Wunder, schönster aller Sterne,
    daß geboren sei, der trägt die Krone,
    vom Hause Juda, der regieret
    die Völker alle, die anführet;
    wird aller Welt Erlöser werden
    und allem Volk, das lebt auf Erden.


_Diener._

    Ich kann euch jetzt berichten nicht,
    weiß wahrlich nicht, wie mir geschieht,
    doch will ich meinen König fragen,
    dann werd ich es euch wieder sagen.

            (Die drei Könige ab nach rechts.)

    Herodes kommt von links und setzt sich auf den Thron.

_Diener._

    Gnädigster Herr König, Gott verleihe Euch langes Leben!
    Es sind drei Männer hier aus fremden Land,
    Die fragen nach einem Königsohn,
    der die ganze Welt erlösen soll.

_Herodes._

    Was bringst du hier für eine Mär?
    Geschwind, daß man sie bringe her.
    Ich will sie fragen, ob sie mich narren,
    sie sollen ganz geschwind erfahren,
    was sie für einen König haben.
    Geschwind Diener, laß sie herkommen!

_Diener_ (zu den drei Weisen).

    Mein gnädigster König und Herr läßt euch sagen:
    Ihr sollet sofort vor ihm erscheinen.

_Melchior._

    Wir werden sofort erscheinen.

    (Die drei Könige treten vor den König.)

_Herodes._

    Was ist das, daß ihr in meinem Land
    nach einem jungen Königssohn fragt?

_Melchior._

    Wir haben seinen Stern gesehen im Morgenlande
    und sind gekommen, ihn anzubeten.

_Herodes._

    Geht einstweilen in eure Herberge,
    bis ich euch rufen lasse.

            (Die Weisen gehen nach rechts ab.)

_Herodes_ (zum Diener.)

    Höre Laban!

_Diener._

    Was ist dein Wille?

_Herodes._

    Hole mir den Hohenpriester in der Stille.

_Diener_ zum Hohenpriester.

    Mein gnädigster Herr König läßt euch sagen,
    ihr sollt sofort vor ihm erscheinen.

_Hohenpriester._

    Werde gleich kommen,

    (tritt ein und verbeugt sich vor dem König)

    Was ist das, daß ihr mich rufen laßt?

_Herodes._

    Es sind drei Männer hier aus fremdem Land,
    die fragen nach einem jungen Königssohn,
    der die ganze Welt erlösen soll.
    Könnt Ihr mir vielleicht sagen,
    was ich mit solchen machen soll?

_Hohenpriester_ (sinnt und spricht)

    Ich meine, es wäre der beste Rat,
    man ließe sie ziehen aus der Stadt,
    bis sie das Kind gefunden han,
    auf daß auch ihr hingehet und betets an.

_Herodes._

    Ich danke Euch für Euern Rat!
    Ich werde mich künftig Euer öfters bedienen.

            (Hohenpriester ab.)

_Herodes_ zum Diener.

    Höre Laban!

_Diener._

    Was ist dein Wille, gnädigster Herr?

_Herodes._

    Die drei Männer sollen sofort vor mir erscheinen!

_Diener_ zu den drei Weisen.

    Ihr sollt sofort zu meinem gnädigsten Herrn König kommen.

_Melchior._

    Wir werden sogleich erscheinen.

    (sie treten vor den König)

    Gott verleihe dem Herrn König langes Leben!

_Herodes._

    Zieht hin und forschet fleißig nach dem Kindelein,
    und wenn ihr es gefunden habt,
    dann kommt und sagt mirs,
    auf daß ich auch hingehe und es anbete.

_Melchior._

    Mein gnädigster Herr und König, es soll ganz nach deinem
      Wunsche geschehen.

    (Die drei Weisen ziehen dreimal um den König herum und treten
    ab.)

    Vorhang fällt.


4. Aufzug.

    Die Weisen von rechts wandernd, Geschenke tragend.

_Melchior._

    Hier werden wir gefunden ham
    das Kindelein aus Judas Stamm.
    Weil hier der Stern so stille steht
    und nicht von diesem Haus abgeht.

            (sie knien nieder und beten an.)

_Melchior._

    Da ich nun dich, König der Ehren, gefunden habe,
    so gebe ich dir meine Gabe,
    nimm hin das Gold aus meinem Schatz,
    so viel ich hab gefunden Platz.

_Caspar._

    Nimm hin den Weihrauch des Gebets
    sei gnädig mir, erhöre stets
    meine Bitten, das in Demut dir
    ich aus dem Herzen bringe für.

_Balthasar._

    Nimm hin die Myrrhen bittrer Reu,
    die ich dir bring aus wahrer Treu.
    Dein Lebenslauf wird bitter sein
    und enden mit sehr großer Pein.

    Nachdem die drei Weisen ihre Gaben dargebracht, erheben sie
    sich und singen gemeinsam: »Ich freue mich in dir«, nach dem
    Gesange legen sie sich schlafen.

_Engel._

    Herodes trachtet nach euerem Leben.
    Ihr sollt nicht wieder zu ihm ziehen,
    sondern einen andern Weg gehen dahin.

            (Engel ab.)

_Melchior_ zu Balthasar.

    Was lamentierst du denn in deinem Sinn,
    daß du so sauer stehst dahin.

_Balthasar._

    Soll ich nicht lamentieren viel,
    dieweil ich ganz verwirret bin,
    durch einen Traum, den ich gehabt
    von Herodes die ganze Nacht.

_Caspar._

    Auch ich träumte in dieser Nacht,
    als wenn Herodes nach uns tracht't,
    und wollt uns alle töten lassen.
    Solln ziehn auf einer andern Straßen.

_Melchior._

    Gott warnt uns gewiß vor ihm,
    daß wir nicht wieder ziehn dahin.

            (Könige ab.)

_Herodes_ zum Diener.

    Höre Laban!

_Diener._

    Was ist der Wille meines gnädigsten Königs?

_Herodes._

    Hast du die drei Weisen nicht wieder nach mir fragen hören?

_Diener._

    Sie sind in der Stille fortgezogen,
    haben uns wahrlich recht betrogen,
    wir sollten sie tot niederschießen,
    wenn wir nur erst ihr Bleibens wüßten.

_Herodes._

    Bleizentner alle Stadtgraben voll,
    vor großem Zorn werd ich jetzt toll!
    du sollst gehen aus meinem Haus,
    ein großes Blutbad richten aus.
    Alle Kinder, die in Bethlehem sind,
    die sollst du töten gar geschwind!
    Alle Kinder von eins und zwei Jahren sollst
    du in einer Stunde getötet haben!

_Diener._

    Was mein gnädigster Herr König befiehlt,
    das will ich tun.

    (Diener ab mit blankgezogener Waffe.)

_Gesang._

    Wenn wir in höchsten Nöten sein usw.

    (Nach dem Gesang kehrt der _Diener_ zurück, steckt sein Schwert
    in die Scheide und spricht zu Herodes):

    Ei, ei! wie hat mein Schwert geschnitten,
    Da half kein Flehen, da half kein Bitten,
    die Kinder schrieen erbärmlich,
    bei mir war kein Verschonen nicht.
    Ei, ei! wie viel hab ich erschlagen,
    trotzdem keiner mir ein Wort kann sagen.

_Herodes._

    Recht so, Diener Laban.

_Gesang._

    »Der Heiland ist geboren« usw.

    Schluß.


Das Steinbacher Mettenspiel.

»Christus ward heut geboren!« Ein altes Mettenspiel aus der
Kirchgemeinde Steinbach i. Erzgeb. Angeblich von einem 1859 daselbst
gestorbenen Kantor Hermann verfaßt. Im 1. Heft des III. Bandes der
Mitteilungen des Vereins für sächsische Volkskunde mitgeteilt von
Pfarrer Köhler und Kantor Bachmann zu Steinbach. Auch ~Dr.~ Alfred
Müller hat das Spiel in seinem schönen Aufsatze: »Eine Mettenfahrt«
(Glück auf 1900, Seite 2) beschrieben. Dieses Spiel ist bis auf die
Gegenwart in der Steinbacher (bei Annaberg) Kirche aufgeführt worden.
Das Spiel unterscheidet sich wesentlich von den volkstümlichen Spielen.
Schon die Sprache ist nicht eigentlich volkstümlich. Der Anfang des
Eröffnungsgedichtes lautet:

    Sei gegrüßt, du Fest der höchsten Liebe,
    das im Zeitenlauf uns wiederkehrt!
    Sei gegrüßt, du Fest der höchsten Freude,
    das uns dankend Gott verehren lehrt!
    Sieh die Flur im weißen Winterkleide
    und den Strom mit festem Eis belegt;
    sieh den Lenz im bunten Festgeschmeide,
    wie er herzlich seine Kinder pflegt!
    Sieh, der Sommer spendet Frucht und Freude,
    die der Herbst im Speicher sorglich legt.
    Alles predigt: Gott ist die Liebe,
    und im Herzen tönts: die Liebe ist Gott
                usw.

In diesem Stile geht es weiter. Im Hirtengespräch sagt:

_Ruben._

    Welche Nacht sank auf die Erd hienieden,
    wie ich sie noch nie erlebt, --
    eine Nacht voll heilger Still und Frieden!
    Heilge Andacht durch die Seele bebt!
    Alles stille! selbst die Lüfte schweigen,
    daß der Tritt im Sand zu Lauten wird,
    und am Himmel, wolkenlos und heiter,
    weidet seine Herd' der große Hirt!

Das Spiel mag, in der Kirche aufgeführt, eine tiefgehende Wirkung
haben, es ist aber doch wohl nicht ein eigentliches Volksspiel. Auch
die Musik ist etwas konventionell, etwa in der Art wie die Kantaten des
alten Plauener Kirchenmusikdirektors F. M. Gast. Es ist im Graserschen
Verlag erschienen.


Ein böhmisches Spiel.

In den Mitteilungen des Vereins für Geschichte der Deutschen in Böhmen,
III. Jahrgang 1865, Seite 115 teilt Joseph Stocklöw Teile eines Spieles
mit, das in der Nähe von Schmiedeberg aufgeführt ward und den Namen
des »boren Kinnel« führte. Hier finden wir unser »Bornkinnel« wieder.
Das Spiel enthält nichts wesentlich Besonderes. Nur ist eine gesungene
Verkündigung durch die Engel an Maria dabei. Auch sonst wird im Spiel,
der böhmischen Sangesfreude entsprechend, viel gesungen.

       *       *       *       *       *

Außer den angeführten Spielen haben sich noch viele Reste erhalten, die
man an verschiedenen Orten »Weihnachtslieder« nannte. So teilt John
(Aberglaube, Sitte und Brauch im sächsischen Erzgebirge Seite 176)
ein Bruchstück solcher Spiele aus Olbernhau mit. Das unbegreifliche
Verbot der Spiele hat verheerend gewirkt. Trotz aller behördlichen und
geistlichen Maßnahmen ging aber das Volk nicht davon ab. Im geheimen
wurde weiter gespielt. Auf originelle Weise umging ein Einwohner von
Raschau das Polizeiverbot: er führte seine Engelschar im Puppentheater
auf und fand enormen Zuspruch. So kam man schließlich darauf, für die
Spiele eine der Polizei genehmere Form zu wählen. Die Geistlichen
nahmen die Sache in die Hand und es entstanden eine größere Anzahl von
sogenannten Weihnachtsstücken oder -spielen, z. B. die an den Pfarrern
Steiniger (Lößnitz), Seidel (Lichtenstein), Lehmann (Freiberg), Müller
(Zwickau), Bauer (Berthelsdorf), Löscher (Zwönitz) u. a. Das beste
dieser Art hat unstreitig der oft erwähnte Gustav Mosen geschaffen. Er
bringt in seinem mehrmals erwähnten Buche zunächst eine größere Anzahl
der alten Spiele und meint zuletzt, daß man die Spiele, da sie meist
Bruchstücke seien, nicht als abendfüllende Aufführung anwenden könne
und dichtet aus dem Geist der Spiele heraus ein neues ganz treffliches
Spiel. Es ist im Graserschen Verlag erschienen in einer Neubearbeitung
Alfred Müllers.

Der Verfasser dieses Buches möchte aber doch den alten Spielen das Wort
reden. Wenn sie auch nicht glatt und fein sind.

Den Weihnachtsspielen erging es wie den Volksliedern. Durch ihre
mündliche Weitergabe änderte sich ihre Originalform. Das Volk geht
mit seinen Dichtungen nicht sehr säuberlich um. Es läßt weg oder
verändert, was ihm mißfällt, wiederholt gern nochmals, was ihm zusagt.
Ort und Zeit sind unwesentliche Dinge, die man dem Gebrauche anpassen
kann, die Lieder zersingt das Volk, die Spiele zerspielt es. Aber sie
sind Geist vom Geiste des Volkes, den zu stärken man sich keine Mühe
verdrießen lassen sollte.

Nehmen wir an, irgend ein Ort findet in den vorerwähnten Spielen seine
»Engelschar« wieder. Er würde sie am 1. Feiertag von einem Verein
oder von Schulkindern gern aufführen aber das Spiel ist zu kurz, zu
unvollkommen. Da stelle man das eigene Spiel in den Mittelpunkt und
entnehme anderen Spielen das Fehlende. Das Ganze rundet sich ab. Auch
sorge man für reichlichen Gesang zwischen den Szenen, und ein Stück
echtes Volksgut ist gerettet. In der Zeit, wo ein Haaß-Berkow durch
seine wunderbare Kunst die Kraft der alten deutschen Volksspiele
beweist, dürfte man einen solchen Versuch wohl wagen.

Die Chemnitzer Volkshochschule hat diesen Vorschlag des Verfassers
aufgegriffen und sucht durch Aufführungen für den Gedanken zu werben.
Es lag nahe, ein Stück zu schreiben, in dem in eine erzgebirgische
Stube die Engelschar tritt, ähnlich, wie es Hermann Löscher in seinem
»Bornkindel« tut. Dankbar sei anerkannt, daß er damit auf das alte
Volksgut eindruckvollst hinweist. Wir wollen aber doch mehr, als nur
Theater. Wie die Christspieler in die größte Stube des Dorfes kamen,
so kommen sie jetzt in den Saal; in banger Erwartung der Engelschar
sitzen die Hörer, da -- da ertönt Gesang, die Engelschar kommt zu
_ihnen_, nicht zu den Personen eines Bühnenstückes. Wir wollen nicht
Zuschauer, sondern Miterleber haben.

Nun muß mit dem Publikum gerechnet werden. Ein Moment fehlt unseren
Spielen fast völlig: das der Spannung. Den Hörern sind die Vorgänge
alle vertraut. Das »Was« wird sie darum weniger interessieren, als das
»Wie«. Dabei darf man das Kostümliche nicht zu gering achten. Alle
Volkskunst, sie mag sein, welche sie will, braucht die Farbe, ohne sie
ist die Volkskunst unfroh, ledern. Darum sei man nicht zu ängstlich mit
der Kleidung der Spielenden, wenn sie sich recht sehr dem Historischen
nähern, ist es durchaus kein Fehler.

Für die Ausgestaltung der Bühne gibt es verschiedene Möglichkeiten.
Daß sie so einfach wie möglich sein möchte, ist ein Gebot der
Notwendigkeit. Am eindrucksvollsten wirkt die einfache Vorhangbühne.
Dunkle Gardinen geben den besten Hintergrund für die farbenfrohen
Gestalten des Spiels. Der Stall fällt weg, es genügt eine einfache
Krippe. Die Krippenszene sei nur von der Stallaterne Josefs erleuchtet.

Eine andere Auffassung ging dahin, die Bühne mehr dekorativ
auszugestalten. Vorbild dafür waren die Weihnachtskrippen unserer
Gebirgsstuben. Ein großer Prospekt mit Aussicht auf Jerusalem oder
Bethlehem schließt die Bühne nach hinten ab. Vor diesem spielen sich
die Szenen ab, die im Freien spielen. Der Felsen des Engels kann durch
eine mit geknittertem Packpapier benagelte Kiste leicht hergestellt
werden.

Für die Stallszenen wird aus Latten und Brettern ein Gerüst errichtet;
nicht zu groß, nur eine Hinterwand, eine Seitenwand, ein Dach mit
Stroh bedeckt. Die eine Seitenwand bleibt weg, wegen der verschiedenen
Anbetungen des Kindleins. Die Wände werden nicht völlig vernagelt,
sodaß überall zu Lücken und Spalten Engel hineinsehen können.

Die Mitte der Bühne wird durch einen Vorhang abgeteilt. Vor diesem
spielen sich alle Innenszenen ab, so die Verkündigung an Maria und
die Herodesszenen. Die Vorderbühne wird durch den Hauptvorhang
abgeschlossen.

            Hintergrund.
    +------------------------+
    |                        |
    |      Hintere Bühne.    |
    |                        |
    |------------------------|
    |                        |
    |                        |
    |------ Vorhang. --------|
    |                        |
    |                        |
    |     Vordere Bühne.     |
    |                        |
    |                        |
    +------------------------+
          Hauptvorhang.

Unter allen Umständen lasse man sowohl die Engelschar, als auch
die Königschar durch den Saal nach der Bühne ziehen, vor die ein
Treppenaufgang gebaut wird. Die Vorhänge möchten geteilt sein.

Die Spieler sollen _natürlich_ sprechen, zu viel Pathos schädigt; vom
Erhabenen zum Lächerlichen ist bekanntlich nur ein Schritt.

Wesentlich ist der Anteil der

        _Musik._

Harmoniumspiel verbindet Gesänge und Szenen. Für die Gesänge benutze
man möglichst alte erzgebirgische Weisen. Man findet solche im
»Musikalischen Anhang« zum Mosenschen Weihnachtsfestspiel, Grasers
Verlag, in »Lied und Spiel zum Preise des Christkindes« von Bernhard
Schneider (Dresden, Huhle), sowie auch in Dosts Weihnachtsliedern aus
dem Erzgebirge. Die bei den Aufführungen der Chemnitzer Volkshochschule
benutzten Gesänge waren von Johannes Halke vierstimmig gesetzt worden.
Beim Einzug der Spieler spielte ein kleines Orchester aus Lauten,
Violinen und Clarinetten zusammengesetzt.

Wir bringen am Schlusse als Beispiel der Verwendbarkeit der alten
Spiele eine Zusammenstellung, die in vielen Aufführungen bereits
erprobt ist. Es lag dem Bearbeiter daran, die einzelnen Stücke nicht
zu zerreißen, darum erscheinen aus den verschiedenen Spielen immer
geschlossene Szenen.

Alte, erstorbene Volksbräuche und Sitten wiederbeleben zu wollen, würde
ein vergebliches und unersprießliches Beginnen sein. Man soll nicht
einen Leichnam ausgraben und ihn buntgeschmückt zur Schau stellen. Das
Vergangene kehrt nicht wieder, wenn es auch lange noch zurückleuchtet.
Wir freuen uns alter Sitten und Gebräuche, hören voll Behagen von
allerlei Aber- und Zuvielglauben -- aber, Gott sei dank, das sind alles
überwundene Dinge.

So wäre die ganze Wissenschaft der Volkskunde nur eine forschende, eine
historisch betrachtende?

Dies ist nicht der Fall. Wohl muß die Volkskunde die Vergangenheit des
Volkes kennen, muß den geheimsten Regungen der Volksseele nachspüren.
Dabei darf sie aber nicht stehen bleiben. Wie eine Zeit die andere
ablöst, wie Geschlechter kommen und gehen, so wandeln sich auch Sitten
und Gebräuche mit den Zeiten um. Dabei sieht man aber mit Betrübnis,
daß die neue Sitte, die die alte ablöste, selten einen Fortschritt
bedeutet, im Gegenteil, gute alte Sitten sind vergangen, schlimmere
sind dafür eingezogen. Nun hat die Volkskunde die Aufgabe, zu wirken,
das, was an altem Volksbrauch lebensfähig ist, zu erhalten, auf gutem
Alten wertvolles Neue aufzubauen.

Man hat gesagt, die erzgebirgischen Christspiele seien tot, es würde
dem Geiste unserer Zeit nicht entsprechen, Wiederbelebungsversuche
vorzunehmen. Dem ist zu widersprechen. Wohl hat eine volksfremde
Geistlichkeit, eine dem Volksempfinden so fern wie möglich stehende
Regierung eine Zeit lang die Spiele unterdrücken können. Sie lebten
aber immer wieder auf. Man schränkte die kirchlichen Mettenspiele ein,
man verbot sie und nahm damit dem Volke ein gut Teil Poesie aus seinem
armseligen Leben. Man trieb die Heiligenchristspieler von der Straße,
ja sperrte sie ein, wie im Jahr 1805 zu Thalheim geschehen ist -- aber
immer erbten sich die Reime weiter.

Wie wollen wir nun die Spiele zu neuem Leben erwecken? Zunächst ist es
wünschenswert, daß alle Orte, die noch Metten und dergleichen besitzen,
sich dieselben nicht nehmen lassen. Wo noch kein Mettengottesdienst
besteht, oder wo er nur rein kirchlich beschaffen ist, lasse man
dies eine Mal im Jahr das Volk hinzu und gestalte den Gottesdienst
entsprechend aus. Aber auch die außerkirchlichen Spiele führe man
wieder auf. Eine große Zahl von Weihnachtsstücken sind geschrieben, die
wohl die Weihnachtsgeschichte dramatisch darstellen, aber doch mehr
oder weniger Theaterstücke sind. Das sollen sie nicht sein. Wir wollen
die schlichten, alten Volksspiele wieder haben.

Aus den vielen Zuschriften, die wir erhielten, ersehen wir mit
Freuden, wie man allerorts unseren Gedanken aufgegriffen hat. Wenn uns
auf unserem Wege die Wiederbelebung dieses Stückes alter Volkskunst
gelingen sollte, würden wir herzlich zufrieden sein.




Verlauf der Spiele.


=Einleitung.=

    =Chor=:

    =Schneeberger Weihnachtslied=

    (Auf Tochter Zion schmücke dich!)


1. =Die Engelschar.=

(Wiesaer Spiel.)

    Der heilige Christ. -- St. Martin. -- St. Nikolaus. -- Die
    Engel. -- Die Hirten. -- Die Ruprechte. -- Der Sternträger.

    Beim Aufzug der Schar wird ein altes böhm. Krippenlied gespielt.


2. =Die Verkündigung an Maria.=

    Maria. -- Der Engel Gabriel.

    Gesang: Altes geistliches Volkslied.


3. =Das Herbergsspiel.=

(Wiesaer Spiel.)

    =Chor=: O Bethlehem, du edle Stadt

    alter Klostergesang.

    Maria. -- Joseph. -- Der Wirt.


4. =Das Hirtenspiel.=

(Thalheimer Spiel.)

    =Chor=: ~Quem pastores laudavere.~

    3 Hirten. -- Der Engel.

    Die =Hirten= singen ein Gottesgaber Krippenlied.


5. =Das Krippenspiel.=

(Neudorfer Engelschar.)

    Maria. -- Joseph. -- Der Wirt. -- Die Hirten. -- Die Engel.

    =Maria= und =Joseph= singen ein Wiegenlied nach einer
    alten Volksweise. Die =Hirten= singen ein Hirtenlied aus
    der Neudorfer Engelschar. Die =Engel= singen ein altes
    Weihnachtslied.


_Kurze Pause._


6. =Das Königsspiel.=

(Thalheimer u. Löwenhainer Spiel)

    =Chor=: Die heiligen drei Könige mit ihrem Stern (alte Weise).

    Kaspar. -- Melchior. -- Balthasar. -- Herodes. -- Laban. --
    Gardeson. -- Der Schriftgelehrte.

    =Chor=: Dein König Zion kommt zu dir. (Schneeberger Mettenlied).


7. =Die Anbetung der Könige.=

(Thalheimer Spiel.)

    Maria. -- Joseph. -- Die 3 Könige. -- Der Engel.

    Das =Wiegenlied= ist der Neudorfer Engelschar entnommen.


8. =Das Spiel vom Kindermord.=

(Thalheimer u. Lengefelder Spiel.)

    Herodes. -- Laban. -- Der Tod. -- Der Engel.


=Beschluß= (Cranzahler Spiel.)

    Maria. -- Joseph. -- Der Engel.


=Allgemeiner Gesang=:

    Heut schleußt er wieder auf die Tür
    zu seinem Paradeis,
    der Cherub steht nicht mehr dafür,
    Gott sei Lob, Ehr und Preis.




Erzgebirgische Christ- und Mettenspiele

Nach alten Volksüberlieferungen zusammengestellt von Max Wenzel




1. Die Engelschar.


    Bei geschlossenem Vorhange singt der Chor:

    =Auf, Tochter Zion, schmücke dich.=

(Schneeberger Weihnachtslied.)

=Der dritte Hirte= tritt auf.

(Wiesaer Spiel.)

    Einen schönen guten Abend, das geb euch Gott!
    Ich bin ein ausgesandter Bot,
    ich zeig euch an zu dieser Frist,
    Daß jetzt wird kommen der heilge Christ.
    Eine schiene gute Nacht! _(Verbeugung.)_

    Er geht ab.

    Hinter der Szene leises Harmoniumspiel (Vom Himmel hoch, da
    komm ich her). Zwei Engel, ein großer und ein kleiner, treten
    ein.

=Der große Engel.=

    Einen schönen guten Abend, ihr lieben Leut (Kindelein[18])
    der heilge Christ läßt euch grüßen,
    was ihm zu tun befohlen ist,
    wird allzeit sein beflissen;
    indem er fährt auf in seinem Paradeis
    und angestellet hat auf Erden seine Reis.
    Heut ist der Tag, da läßt er seine Schellen klingen.

    (Ruprecht läßt hinter der Szene seine Schellen klingen.)

    Er wird euch viel Geschenk und Gaben mit sich bringen,
    wenn ihrs zufrieden seid, so führ ich ihn herein,
    doch dürft ihr aber nicht zu sehr erschrocken sein.
    Denn wer fein fromm gewesen ist,
    den wird er freundlich loben.
    Komm immer, komm herein, du heilger Christ von oben.

    Die Engel stellen sich rechts und links vor die Rampe, sie
    bilden den Abschluß der im Halbkreis aufgestellten Engelschar.
    Die Engelschar tritt unter den Klängen der _böhmischen
    Kinderweise_ gemessenen Schrittes ein. Sie umwandelt einmal die
    Bühne und stellt sich dann, im Mittelpunkt der heilige Christ,
    im Halbkreis auf.

=Der heilge Christ.=

    Wohlan, ihr Kinderlein, wie habt ihr euch verhalten?
    Habt ihr auch respektiert die Lehrer und die Alten?
    Die Eltern auch geliebt, mit Willen nie betrübt,
    was sie befohlen euch, und sie erzürnet nicht?
    Erschrecket nicht vor mir und meiner Majestat!
    Examiniere du, Martin, an meiner Statt.

=Martin.=

    Ach Herr, wie soll ich denn vor dir examinieren?
    Du weißt ja selbst, wie oft die Engel Klage führen,
    daß man allhier unter dem zehnten Kind
    in manchem Haus ja nicht ein frommes findt.
    Der Mutwill ist zu groß, die Bosheit nicht zu sagen,
    indem ja in der Schul auch ihre Lehrer klagen,
    indem sie auch zu Haus gar selten fromm sein,
    wie ich hab itzt gehört von diesem Engelein.

=Der heilge Christ.=

    Ei, ei, das ist nicht fein, daß ich jetzt Klag muß hörn!
    ich dürfte mich hinfort von euch gen Himmel kehren.
    Mich reuets jetzt, daß wir in dieser kalten Nacht
    bis her an diesem Ort uns haben aufgemacht.
    Drum, Niklaus, sags dem Knecht, wir wolln von hinnen fahren
    und wollen unsre Schätz auf fromme Kinder sparen.

=Nikolaus.=

    Ach lieber, heilger Christ, sehr groß von Gütigkeit,
    schau und bedenke doch die alte Freundlichkeit.
    Du wirst doch nicht so schnell mit uns von hinnen eilen,
    sondern ihnen zuvor mit deiner Gabe teilen.
    Es möchten doch noch etliche unter diesen Kindlein sein,
    die nicht so mutwillig möchten gewesen sein,
    wie jetzt vermeldet ist; ich schau dirs vom Angesicht,
    daß dir aus Lieb, Herr Christ, das Herze bricht.

=Der heilge Christ.=

    Ja freilich bricht es mir, ich bin ja Mensch geboren
    und war ein kleines Kind, drum sind sie mir erkoren
    bei meiner kleinen Herd: ihr Kinder weinet nicht,
    ich bin auch allen hold, mein Zorn ist schon geschlicht.

=Der große Ruprecht.=

    Hopp, hopp, Gotts Perlemann, Gotts Schwafel un Pach!
    Gleich wie sich Mausdrack unern Pfaffer mischt,
    su bin ich a uner dan heiling Christ.
    Ich tat amol vorüberga,
    Do hört ich e weiß Wunner a,
    Dos Geschrei war in dan Haus su sehr,
    als wenn de Stub voll klaner, klaner, Kinner, Kinner wär!

=Der kleine Engel.=

    Hans, pack dich alsobald mit deinem groben Trutzen,
    sonst will ich dir den Kopf mit Feuerschlägen putzen.
    Geh hin, examinier die andern in dem Haus,
    wer dir nicht folgen will, den jag und schlage naus.

=Der große Ruprecht.=

    Hopphopp, du klaner Schnipper du,
    kannst du dei Maul net halten zu?
    Ich hob gedacht, ich will mein lange, lange Sack vollfülln,
    doch muß ich tu noch deinem Willn.
    Doch gieh ich net leer aus diesem Haus,
    ich will schlong alles naus,
    will Knecht und Mägd examiniern
    und will sie auf die Dauer, Dauer vexiern.

=Der heilge Christ.=

    Komm, Ruprecht, sage an, wie verhalten sich
    Knechte und Mägde allhier in diesem Haus?

=Der große Ruprecht.=

    Ach Herr, sie trachten spät und früh,
    was sie kriegen für ihre Müh;
    drum, so sei es mein gedenk,
    gib ihnen zum Heiligenchristgeschenk
    Prügelsuppen und Maulschellen,
    Ziegenspeck und Pferkorallen.

=Der kleine Ruprecht.=

    Ei, so muß ich mei Maul aa drinne hobn,
    sonst frassen mein Ranzen de Grilln un de Schwobn.
    Heut is gewasen ene kalte Nacht,
    kälter hätt ichs net gedacht,
    ich kunnt vir Kält bal nimmer stieh,
    ich mußt e bissel of men Fald rümgieh.

=Der große Ruprecht.=

    Du Schlingel, du Bengel, mußt aa dreireden?
    Ich wöllt dich gleich mit Füßen treten,
    mit Füßen treten, mit Füßen stußen,
    daß de kaast ke Wort mehr kußen!

    Während des Streites der beiden haben die andern Glieder der
    Engelschar behaglich schmunzelnd zugehört. -- Der heilge
    Christ winkt jetzt dem _kleinen Engel_, den großen Ruprecht
    unterbrechend.

=Der kleine Engel.=

(Thalheimer Spiel.)

    Vorsichtige, Künste liebende Herren und Frauen,
    wie Sie allhier versammelt sein, zu hören und zu schauen,
    was dies für ein Spiel mag sein --
    Nicht Silber, Gold oder Geld,
    welches liebt die ganze Welt,
    sondern das liebe Jesulein
    das wollen wir fürtragen,
    wie Herodes mit List
    getracht nach dem Kindlein Jesus Christ,
    es zu töten.
    Wir bitten, sein Sie fein still,
    wir wollen agieren unser Spiel.
    Puer natus in Bethlehem, unde gaudet Jerusalem.
    Drei Könige aus Saba kommen dahar
    Gold, Weihrauch, Myrrhen brachten sie dar.
          Alleluja!

    Die Musik setzt mit der böhmischen Hirtenweise ein. Die
    Engelschar marschiert ab. -- Das Harmonium nimmt die böhmische
    Weise auf und leitet sehr leise über zum Ave Maria.

    Der Vorhang fällt.




2. Die Verkündigung an Maria.

(Alte Weise.)


    _Gabriel._ _Maria._ -- Vordere Bühne.

    Maria in Andacht versunken.

=Gabriel.=

    Ave Maria jungfräuliche Zier!
    Du bist voller Gnaden, der Herr ist mit dir!
    Eine ganz neue Botschaft, ein unerhörtes Ding
    von der himmlischen Hofstatt dir Gabriel mitbringt.

=Maria.=

    Ach mein Gott, was sollen die Wörter immer sein?
    Wer will zu mir kommen ins Zimmer herein?
    Die Tür ist verschlossen, die Fenster sein zu.
    Wer ist es, der mich stört in der nächtlichen Ruh?

=Gabriel.=

    Fürcht dich nicht, Maria! es geschieht dir kein Leid;
    ich bin zu dir kommen, verkündgen große Freud,
    du sollst den empfangen und tragen einen Sohn,
    den die Menschen verlangen viel tausend Jahr schon.

=Maria.=

    Wie soll das geschehen, ich kenn ja keinen Mann?
    Ich will lieber eingehn, als tragen einen Sohn.
    Ich habe geschworen meine Jungfrauschaft Gott;
    ich bin dazu geboren, verbleib bis in den Tod.

=Gabriel.=

    Es liegt nichts im Wege, deine Sorg ist umsunst.
    Alle Furcht tu weglegn! bei Gott is keine Kunst,
    kann leichte geschehen, auf Gott nur fest bau!
    Man wird dich verehren als Mutter und Frau.

=Maria.=

    Ich kanns nicht recht fassen in meinem Verstand,
    ich wills Gott überlassen, der göttlichen Hand.
    Sein Wille geschehe! wenns Gott so gefällt,
    so will ich gern tragen den Heiland der Welt.

    _Vorhang._

    Musikalische Ueberleitung zum Chor (Altkirchliche Weise):

    O Bethlehem du edle Stadt,
    du meines Geschlechtes Herkommen,
    von denen auch der David hat
    sein Ursprung hergenommen!
    Ach, über mich erbarme dich!
    Weil d' Nacht anbricht, verstoß mich nicht!
    Ein Zimmerlein vergonne!




3. Das Herbergsspiel.

(Wiesaer Spiel)


    Hintere Bühne. Links (vom Zuschauer) das Wirtshaus mit
    charakteristischem Wirtshauszeichen (Stern, Roß, Bär, Traube
    oder dergl.). Möglichst einige Versatzstücke (Palme, Brunnen).
    -- Der Wirt steht vor der Tür. Maria und Joseph treten auf.

=Joseph.=

    Hörst du, Maria aus Davids Stadt allda,
    wir wollen uns beide schätzen la.
    Wie könnten wir aber recht erfahren,
    wo wir heut Nacht möchten Herberg habn?
    Wir sind auf dieser Reis' fürwahr
    gewesen in sehr großer Gefahr,
    habens Gott zu danken sehr,
    daß er uns geholfen bis hierher.
    Dort sah ich einen feinen Maa,
    und in sein Haus wir wollen gah,
    und ihn um Herberg sprechen aa.
    Einen schönen guten Abend, mein lieber Herr Wirt!

=Wirt.=

    Habt Dank, mein lieber Alter, wo kommt Ihr jetzt hierher?

=Joseph.=

    Ho, ho, ho! Ihr dürft net schreie halb so sehr,
    schreit Ihr doch, als wenn ich gleich aller taub wär.
    Ich un das Weibele kommen aus der Stadt
    in Galiläa, die heißt Nazareth.
    Die Schatzung ist in aller Walt,
    Dem Kaiser wollen berichten bald.
    Drum bitten wir Euch, als fromme Leut,
    Ihr wollt uns aufnehmen zur Herberg heut.

=Wirt.=

    Nein, mein lieber Alter, das kann nicht sein.

=Joseph.=

    I wozu dä?

=Wirt.=

    Es sind bei mir gekehret ein --

=Joseph.=

    Nu wer dä?

=Wirt.=

    Viel tapfere Herren, Frau'n und Mann,
    die fast alle gehören daran.

=Joseph.=

    Nu, da rutschen mer aa mit na.

=Wirt.=

    Von Rom, der großen mächtigen Stadt
    und von der kaiserlichen Majestat.
    Drum traut und glaubt mir,
    ihr könnt keine Herberge bekommen allhier,
    weil alles ist genommen ein
    von kaiserlichen Abgesandten, die allhier sein.

=Joseph.=

    Hörst de, Maria, gieh du naa,
    weil ich nischt richten kaa.

=Maria.=

    Herr Wirt, ich bitte Euch durch Gott,
    betrachtet meine große Not,
    Den Zustand, den es hat mit mir.
    Vergönnt mir doch ein Oertlein hier,
    ein Oertlein, mir bequem,
    damit ich keinen Schaden nehm.

=Wirt.=

    Ich weiß euch anders keinen Rat,
    von wegen der kaiserlichen Majestat.
    Wollt ihr aber verlieb nehmen mit dem Stall,
    so geht hinein,
    Derselbe soll euch vergunnet sein.

=Maria.=

    Ach, was soll ich in dem Stall bei dem unvernünftgen Vieh,
    und ist zu groß die Kält allhie.

=Wirt.=

    Ihr hört ja wohl, wie sichs verhält,
    drum sag ich euch zum letzten Mal,
    vergunnet soll euch sein der Stall;
    ich kann euch anders helfen nicht,
    so helft euch, wie ihr könnt und wißt.

            (Ab ins Haus.)

=Joseph.=

    Maria, es ist halt Gottes Geschick,
    wir frommen Leut haben halt kein Glück.
    Wir wollen uns uf e Winkele machen,
    Gott wird schicken alle die Sachen,
    er wird uns nehmen in seine Hut
    und wird uns halten für recht und gut.

            (Sie gehen hinter das Haus ab.)




4. Das Hirtenspiel.

(Thalheimer Spiel.)


    Freudige Orgeleinleitung; überleitend zum

=Chor=: ~Quem pastores laudavere.~

    Den die Hirten lobeten sehre,
    und die Engel noch viel mehre,
    fürcht euch fürbaß nimmermehre,
    euch ist geboren ein König der Ehre.

    Fort ihr Sorgen dieser Erden!
    Weg, ihr traurigen Gebärden!
    Licht soll es im Herzen werden;
    Jesus selber bringt das Licht.

    Hintere Bühne. Freies Feld, im Hintergrund Bethlehem. Links
    ein Felsen, auf dem der Engel erscheint. 3 Hirten. Der 1. Hirt
    steht, auf seinem Stab gestützt, als Wachender, der 2. Hirt
    sitzt am Boden, der 3. Hirt liegt und schläft.

=Der 1. Hirt.=

    Wir armen Schäfersleut sind wohl auf dieser Erden
    von der geringsten Art, die kaum genannt mag werden.
    Im Sommer über liegen wir wohl auf dem freien Feld,
    haben wenig Brot und auch dazu kein Heller Geld,
    im Winter aber müssen wir viel Kält und Frost ausstehen,
    und dürfen überdies noch keine Nacht zu Bette gehen.
    Der Wolf schleicht um die Schafe bald nieder, bald auf.
    Drum heißt es, ihr Schäfersleut habt fleißig acht darauf.

=Der 2. Hirt.=

    Ich lasse nicht alle Hoffnung schwinden,
    dieweil wir nun von unsern Sünden
    so Gott uns will durch wahre Buß bekehren
    so wird er uns viel Guts bescheren.

    (Die Orgel beginnt sehr leise zu spielen: Vom Himmel hoch
    da ...)

    Halt an, halt an, was hör ich klingen
    und fröhlich in den Lüften singen?

=Der 1. Hirt= _(weckt den 3.)_

    Auf auf Gespann, die Nacht ist schon vergangen,
    wir wolln mit Freuden wieder einen neuen Tag anfangen,
    dieweil wir nun die Pflicht der Ruh genossen,
    so wolln wir säumen nicht, doch längst schon unverdrossen
    des Höchsten Ruhm erhebe sich
    mit Danken und mit Beten;
    allein, was seh ich doch
    von dorther zu uns treten?
    Weil dann die Furcht mit Schrecken gar kein Ende nimmt,
    schaut her, der helle Glanz, der jetzt herzu uns kimmt!

=Der kleine Engel=, _auf dem Felsen stehend_.

    (Die Hirten, in malerischen Stellungen, starren erschrocken zu
    ihm auf.)

    Hört, ihr Hirten, fürcht euch nicht,
    eine große Freud, die ich euch bericht;
    denn euch ist heut der Heiland geboren,
    welcher ist Christus auserkoren.
    Zu Bethlehem in Davids Stadt,
    wie Micha es verkündet hat,
    in einem Kripplein liegt das Kind
    so eilet, daß ihr bald es find't!

=Chor der Engel= _(hinter der Szene.)_

Ehre sei Gott in der Höhe, Friede auf Erden und den Menschen ein
Wohlgefallen!

    (Während des Gesanges verschwindet der Engel.)

=Der 1. Hirt.=

    Nun, hört doch, ihr lieben Gespann' mein,
    zu uns Hirten ist kommen ein Engelein,
    hat uns verkündet von einem schönen Kindelein,
    welches liegt in einem Krippelein;
    dies, dies soll der Heiland sein.

=Der 2. Hirt.=

    Nun, wohlan, so laßt uns gahn,
    um diese Dinge recht erfahren,
    Dieweil uns Gott der Herr hat solches kund getan,
    unser Vieh wird er indessen wohl bewahren.

=Der 1. Hirt.=

Ihr Brüder, haben wir auch dem Kindlein etwas mitzubringen?

=Der 3. Hirt.=

    Ach, ich wüßte nichts von unserm armen Hirtenleben,
    das wir dem Kindlein könnten geben,
    doch wollen wir singen ein schönes Liedelein
    zu Ehren dem schönen Kindelein!

=Die Hirten= und Chor mit Begleitung

(Gottesgaber Krippenlied.)

=Die Hirten.=

    Lieber Bruder geh auch mit mir,
    nimm den Dudelsack zu dir,
    Pfeifen und Fagott!
    Gehen wir nach Bethlehem,
    zu der Stadt Jerusalem,
    :,: zu dem Jesuskind! :,:

            (Die Hirten ab.)

    Vorhang fällt.

    Chor singt weiter:

    Treten wir zum Stall herein
    zu dem Jesuskindelein,
    singen wir alldort!
    Friert denn nicht das kleine Kind?
    's geht ja durch und durch der Wind,
    's ist wahrhaftig schlecht, 's ist wahrhaftig schlecht.

    Wenn ich nur ein Häusel hätt,
    das auf Grund und Boden steht
    in der Stadt allein;
    wollt ich ja dich, kleines Kind,
    somt der Mutter nehmen geschwind
    in mein Häusel nein.

    Wieg und Bett, das hab ich schon,
    daß mans Kindlein wiegen kann,
    wenn das Kindlein weint;
    Mehl und Milch, das hab ich schon,
    daß ein Brei man kochen kann,
    wenn das Kindlein weint.




5. Das Krippenspiel.


=Der Wirt= _tritt vor dem vordersten Vorhang_.

(Mildenauer Engelschar.)

    Singet und springet und freuet euch alle,
    denn Jesus ist heut geboren im Stalle.
    Jesus ist zu uns vom Himmel gekommen,
    jauchzet, frohlocket und singt, ihr Frommen.
    Ihr Vöglein in Lüften tut fröhlich nun singen,
    und tut dem Kindelein Bettelein bringen,
    zauset und mauset euch Federlein raus,
    machet dem Kinde Bettelein draus.

            [Ab.]

    Das Harmonium setzt mit dem Vorspiel zum Kindelwiegenlied ein.
    Der Vorhang geht auf.

    Der Stall. Maria und Joseph, in der Krippe das Kind.

    Die Szene wird _nur_ durch Josephs Stallaterne beleuchtet.

=Maria= _(singt.)_

    Joseph, lieber Joseph mein,
    Hilf mir wiegen mein Kindelein!
    Gott, der wird dein Lohner sein
    im Himmelreich, der Jungfrau Kind Maria.

=Joseph.=

    Gerne, lieb Maria mein,
    möcht ich wiegen dein Kindelein,
    da des Kindes Wiegelein
    ist dies kalte Krippelein, Maria.

=Beide.=

    Englein, die ihr uns umschwebt,
    dient dem Kind, euer Stimm erhebt,
    singt Gloria,

=Chor der Engel= _(hinter der Szene.)_

    ~Gloria in excelsis Deo!~

=Die Hirten= _(draußen.)_. (Neudorfer Engelschar.)

    Holla! Holla!

=Joseph.=

    Wer da? Wer da?

    (Die Hirten treten ein.)

=Der erste Hirt.=

    Liegt hier das Kindelein,
    das unser Herr soll sein?

=Joseph.=

    Hier liegt es in der Mutter Schoß
    ganz arm und elend, nackt und bloß.

=Der 2. Hirt.=

    Was bringt es Gutes mit, und warum ist es kommen?

=Maria.=

    Damit der ewge Fluch von euch sei weggenommen,
    stellt es sich in der Welt aus Liebe zu euch ein
    und will auch wiederum mit Lieb verehret sein.

=Der 3. Hirt.=

    O allerschönstes Kind, sei tausendmal willkommen!
    Durch dich wird aller Schmerz und Not hinweggenommen,
    O teurer Himmelsprinz, wie schöne siehest du!
    Hab Dank, daß du der Welt hier bringest Fried und Ruh!

=Die drei Hirten= _(singen.)_[19]

    Bethlehem, uns wundert alle,
    wie es immer zu mag gehn,
    daß in einem kleinen Stalle
    kann des Himmels Glanz entstehn.
    Hat denn nur der Sterne Menge
    Raum in einer solchen Enge?

    Aber du, o Mensch vor allen
    Hebe deine Stimm empor,
    laß dein Freudenlied erschallen
    dort in jenem Engelchor,
    daß den Hirten auf der Weide
    heut verkündigt solche Freude.

    Lebendes Bild. Das Harmonium leitet über zu dem _Chor_: _Vom
    Himmel hoch, ihr Engel kommt!_

    Vom Himmel hoch, ihr Engel kommt!
    Eia! Eia!
    Susani, Susani, susani!
    Kommt, singt und springt
    Kommt pfeift und trommelt
    Alleluja! Alleluja!
    Von Jesus singt und Maria!

    Während des Gesanges füllt sich der Hintergrund mit großen und
    kleinen Engeln, die sich malerisch um den Stall gruppieren.

    Singt Fried den Menschen weit und breit!
    Eia! Eia!
    Susani, susani, susani!
    Gott Preis und Ehr in Ewigkeit
    Alleluja! Alleluja!
    Von Jesus singt und Maria!

    Der Vorhang fällt.




6. Das Königsspiel.


    Während der letzten Strophen des folgenden Liedes zieht die
    Königschar ein. Ordnung: Sternträger, die drei Könige, Herodes
    mit seinem Hofstaat, in einiger Entfernung der Tod.

=Chor= _(hinter der Szene.)_

    Die heilgen drei Könige mit ihrigem Stern
    will ich euch besingen, ihr Fraun und ihr Herrn!
    Ihr Stern gab allen den Schein,
    ein neues Jahr geht uns herein.

    Sie kamen aus ihrem Dörfel hinaus,
    Der Melchor der macht gleich den andern voraus,
    und beten und singen gar schön
    das Kyrieleison.

    Sobald als sie kamen zum Dörfel hinaus,
    guckt wieder der Stern aus den Wolken heraus,
    und führt uns hinab auf das Sträßel
    ins Krippel zum Ochsen und Esel.

    Schnell zieht König Kasper die Geldbörse raus
    St. Melchor, der opfert ein Blumenstrauß,
    Der Balzar ein paar Pfund Weihrauch
    da lächelt das Kindlein auch.
    Die heilgen drei Könige mit ihrigem Stern,
    sie essen und trinken und bezahlen nicht gern.
    Ihr Stern gab uns allen den Schein,
    ein neues Jahr geht uns herein.

=Kasper.= (Thalheimer Spiel.)

    Ich, König Kasper aus Hustitz,
    ich besitze zwar großen Verstand und Witz,
    wie daß ich aber seh gewiß,
    daß der Stern erschienen is!

            (Er zeigt hinauf.)

=Melchior.=

    Ich König Melchor aus Griechewitz,
    ich besitze zwar großen Verstand und Witz,
    wie daß ich aber sah gewiß,
    daß der Stern erschienen is.

            (Er zeigt hinauf.)

=Balthasar.=

    Ich bin der Schwarze aus Mohrenland,
    ich, König Balzar aus Oriant werd ich genannt,
    ich sags euch frei nach meinem schlechten Verstand gewiß,
    daß der Stern erschienen is.

            (Er zeigt hinauf.)

=Kasper= (Löwenhainer Spiel.)

    Ich muß mir doch voritzt von Herzen gratulieren,
    da uns der liebe Gott tut so zusammenführen,
    die wir in gleicher Gunst einander zugetan;
    dazu was zeigt sich dort an jenem Himmelsplan?
    Ich habe einen Stern ganz neu und hell ersehn,
    daraus ich schließen muß, es sei was Neues geschehn:
    Gott hat ein großes Licht uns Heiden angezünd,
    die wir voritzo sind gewesen gänzlich blind.

=Melchior.=

    Ich habs auch also absolviert:
    Mein Herz befind sich so gerührt,
    daß ich schließ draus ohne Heuchelei,
    daß ich bekenne froh und frei:
    Der Juden König ist geboren,
    den Gott hat ewig auserkoren;
    Denselben wollen wir beten an,
    weil Gott uns solches kundgetan.

=Balthasar.=

    Ihr Herren, ich stimme auch mit ein
    zu reden von diesem Sternenschein;
    dieweil sein Glanz bestrahlt mein Herz
    und sich entzünd wie eine Kerz.
    Die Juden werden nicht allein
    zu dieser Gnad berufen sein,
    die sie vielleicht erkennen nicht,
    drum zeigt uns Gott dies Heil und Licht.

=Kasper.=

    Wohlan, ihr Herrn, ich bin bereit
    zu schauen diese Herrlichkeit,
    die uns der Herr hat kundgetan.
    Wer macht sich mit mir auf die Bahn
    zu folgen diesem Sterne nach,
    bis wir antreffen dies Gemach,
    wo dieser König residiert? --
    Der Stern uns gewißlich dahin führt!

=Melchior.=

    Kein Geld und Gut mich dauern mag,
    ich zieh mit hin bei Nacht und Tag,
    bis daß ich finde dieses Heil,
    dann geb ich ihm mein Herz zu Teil!

=Balthasar.=

    In Gottes Namen wag ichs mit,
    der Engel Gottes uns behüt,
    und führ uns zu dem Kindelein,
    so wollen wir ihm dankbar sein.

            (Sie ziehen ab.)

    Vorhang zu.

    Die Orgel, bezw. die Musik spielt eine Strophe des heilgen
    Drei-König-Liedes.

    _Vordere Bühne._ Thronsessel. Gardeson[20] und Laban.

=Gardeson.=

    Meine Herren, schön guten Tag oder Nacht, guten
    Abend, weiß ich doch selber nicht, wie ich in der Zeit bin,
    so wünsch ich Sie allen insgesamt nach dem neuen
    Jahr eine rechte, große, lange, dicke, fette Fastnacht
    oder eine Bratworst!

    Haben Sie dabei was Gutes zu trinken oder zu essen,
    so tun Sie meiner auch nicht vergessen.
    Es mag sein Gebratens, Gesottens,
    Gekochts, Gepochts, Bier oder Wein --
    so will ich allezeit ohne Entgeld ihr Gast mit sein.

=Laban.=

    Solche Narren find man überall.

=Gardeson=

    (fährt ihm mit einem Tuch über den Mund.)

    Ein Fuchsschwanz ist kein Nimmerzahl;
    nimm du dir einen Pfifferling,
    wisch dir dein Maul ab allzumal.

=Laban.=

    Gardeson, du sollst zum König komm!

=Gardeson.=

    Ja, ja! Du hast mich gewiß schon verklagt.

=Herodes= _(tritt auf.)_

=Gardeson= _(verneigt sich vor ihm.)_

    Herr König, ich bin schon da!

=Herodes.=

    Gardeson, wo bist du so lange gewesen?
    Ich werde dir den Küchenmeister eine Lektion lassen lesen.

=Gardeson.=

    Geduld, Herr König, ich ging spazieren,
    zu sehen was Neues tät passieren
    Da fand ich, der Kuckuck sagt es mir,
    daß bei einer guten Kanne Bier
    man öfters viel erfahren tut --
    ich sags Ihnen zwar mit schlechtem Mut:
    Herr König, tun Sie mich nicht verraten,
    sonst möcht ich kriegen den Kuckuck zum Braten.

=Herodes.=

    Vertrau mir, Gardeson, geschwind,
    was hörest du vor neue Find'?

=Gardeson.=

    Herr König, es sind Kundschafter da!

=Herodes.=

    Du bist ein Narr, das weiß ich ja;
    du glaubst alles, was man sagt.

=Gardeson.=

    So laß mich forthin unbefragt.

    Die Könige treten auf.

    (Thalheimer Spiel.)

=Balthasar.=

    Glück und Sieg nach stetem Frieden
    sei mit dir, König aus Judäa!

=Herodes.=

    Meinen untertänigsten Dank sagt man den Herren frei,
    Sie sind mir willkommen, die Herren alle drei.
    Sie sollen mir aber Bescheid tun, wer sie sein,
    Denn ihre Gestalt ist fremd, desto wichtiger muß ihre Sache sein.

=Balthasar.=

    König Herodes, wir sind in seiner Gewalt,
    und demütigen uns, für seiner Gestalt.
    Was aber unsere Verrichtung sei?
    Wir wollen fragen, wo der neugeborene König der Juden sei.
    Denn wir haben seinen Stern gesehen im Morgenland, weit von fern,
    Und sind deswegen gekommen an,
    Das liebe Kind zu beten an.

=Herodes.=

    Hu! Ich weiß von keinem König nichts,
    ich bin König und kein andrer nicht.
    Wär mir ein neuer König geboren,
    wär mein ganzes Königreich verloren.
    Ich will mir aber balden lassen fordern her
    einen Schriftgelehrten, dieser soll ratschlagen,
    wo und in welcher Stadt zu finden ist ein solches Kind.
    Hallo! mein Diener Laban fordere mir alsbald einen Schriftgelehrten!

=Laban.=

    Ganz gehorsam, ihre König Majestät!

            Geht an die Seite und ruft hinaus:

    Der Schriftgelehrte soll alsbald zu Königs Majestät kommen.

=Schriftgelehrter.=

    (Mit großer Brille, Buch, schwarz gekleidet, jüdisch.)

    O weih! O weih! wie geschieht mir --
    ist etwas beim königlichen Hof vorgegangen?

=Laban.=

    Unfehlbar.

=Schriftgelehrter.=

    Ei Schalom, ei Schalom, mein lieber Herr König,
    was ist ihr Bitten und Begehr,
    daß Sie mich haben lassen fordern hierher?

=Herodes.=

    Hör, ein groß Wunder kommt mir für Ohren,
    welches mir verkünd ist, ein neuer König ist geboren,
    Dieweil allda sind zu Hand
    Drei Könige aus dem Mohrenland.
    Die fragen mich ohn alle Scheu,
    wo der neugeborene König der Juden sei.
    Drum sag und bericht in der Tat,
    wo und in welcher Stadt
    zu finden ist ein solches Kind.

=Schriftgelehrter.=

    Soviel ich weiß und befindlich ist,
    so schreibt der Prophet Micho
    im 5. seiner Kapitel also:
    Und du Bethlehem Ephrata,
    Die du klein bist unter den Tausenden in Juda,
    aus dir soll mir der kommen,
    Der über mein Volk ein Herr sei, ein Herr sei!

=Herodes= _(zu den Königen.)_

    Nun hört, ihr großen Herrn insgemein --
    ihr sollt mir aber Bescheid tun, wo euch der Stern erschienen ist.

=Kasper.=

    Wo uns der Stern erschienen ist,
    das sagen wir zu dieser Frist:
    Er ist uns erschienen im Morgenland,
    drum haben wir uns gemacht auf den Weg bald.

=Herodes.=

    Nun hört doch, ihr großen Herrn insgemein,
    ziehet nun hin nach Bethlehem fein;
    und sucht fleißig, bis daß ihrs find't,
    und wenn ihrs dann gefunden habt,
    so kommt wieder her in diese Stadt,
    und bericht mich auch fein geschwind,
    daß ich auch komme und anbete das liebe Kind,
    und große Schätze gebe fein,
    und mit mir nehme aufs Schloß herein;
    ich wollte wünschen, Sie kämen glücklich an den Ort.

=Melchior.=

    So wir das liebe Kind werden treffen an,
    so wollen wir ihre König Majestät kund und zu wissen tun.

=Kasper= _(verneigt sich.)_

    Wir danken vor die Gütigkeit --

=Melchior= _(verneigt sich.)_

    und sind zu dienen stets bereit.

=Balthasar.=

    Sie leben wohl zu aller Zeit! _(verneigt sich.)_

            _Die Könige ab._

=Gardeson= (Löwenheiner Spiel.)

    Das das mögen wohl rechte Narren sein --
    ich kann mir es fürwahr nicht anders bilden ein!
    Daß ein klein Kind von Bethlehem
    soll herrschen zu Jerusalem,
    mein Herr gibt das gar schwerlich zu,
    es wird sonst da werden die größte Unruh!

    Vorhang zu.

=Chor= _(hinter der Szene.)_

    _Dein König, Zion_ (Schneeberger Mettenlied.)

    Dein König, Zion, kommt zu dir.
    »Ich komm, im Buche steht von mir!«
    Gott, deinen Willen tu ich gern,
    gelobt sei, der da kommt im Herrn.

    Herr, der du Mensch geboren wirst,
    Imanuel und Friedefürst,
    auf den die Väter hoffend sahn,
    Dich, Gott, Messias, bet ich an!

    Du unser Heil und höchstes Gut,
    vereinest dich mit Fleisch und Blut,
    wirst unser Freund und Bruder hier,
    und Gottes Kinder werden wir.




7. Die Anbetung der Könige.


    _Hintere Bühne._ Stall. (Thalheimer Spiel.)

=Maria.=

    Joseph, lieber Joseph mein,
    zünd mir an ein Feuerlein,
    Koch dem Kind ein Breielein.

=Joseph.=

    Maria, Maria, das will ich gern tun,
    Dieweil nun schläft der liebe Suhn,
    will ich dir machen ein Feuerlein
    und kochen dem Kind ein Breielein.
    Den Brei koch ich und bück mich hart,
    dabei anbrenn ich mir den Bart.
    Jetzt kommt die kalte Winterszeit,
    so beschwerlich über uns arme Leut,
    daß ich fast so erfroren bin,
    so dauert mich das liebe Kind.

    _Die drei Könige._

    (Cranzahler Spiel.)

=Kasper.=

    Guten Abend, mein lieber alter Herr!
    Ist das der König der Ehren?
    Ist das das liebe Kindelein,
    welches aller Welt ein Herr soll sein?

=Joseph.=

    Ja, ja, man sagts zu dieser Frist,
    daß ein neuer König geboren ist.

=Kasper= _(anbetend.)_

    Ach, mein herzliebes Jesulein,
    nimm an die Verehrung mein,
    an rotem Golde zeig ich dir hier,
    daß dein Reich ewig soll bestehn!

=Balthasar.=

    Den Weihrauch ich auch opfer dir,
    welcher alleine gebühret dir,
    weil du von Gott bist hergestellt
    zu einem Priester der ganzen Welt.

=Melchior.=

    Nimm hier die Myrrhen, die ich dir schenk.
    Ich bitt, du wollst sein mein eingedenk,
    mich führen in den Himmel ein,
    in deines Vaters Reich allein.

=Joseph.=

    Nun, ihr lieben Herrn, Gott dank euch sehr
    für solche Geschenke, Gab und Ehr.

    _Alle_ singen. Wiegenlied aus der Neudorfer Engelschar.[21]

    Kommet her zu dieser Krippen,
    alle, die im Stalle sind,
    und belobet mit den Lippen
    unser neugebornes Kind!
    Stimmt ein! Stimmt mit Maria ein:
    Eia, schlaf, schlaf ein, schlaf ein!
    Schlaf mein liebes Jesulein, schlaf bald ein!

=Kasper.= (Thalheimer Spiel.)

    Ich bin müd und abgematt,
    die Abendzeit uns überschatt,
    wir wollen ein wenig schlummern ein,
    Gott, Gott wird unser Hüter sein.

            (Setzt sich nieder.)

=Melchior.=

    So ruht ihr abgematten Glieder
    und genießt der süßen Ruh,
    legt euch ohne Sorgen nieder,
    Gottes Güte deckt euch zu.

=Balthasar.=

    Mein Herz sehnt sich nach seiner Ruhe!

=Der Engel= _(zu den Königen.)_

    Hört ihr drei Weisen aus Morgenland:
    Von Gott bin ich zu euch gesandt,
    daß ihr sollt euch von dem Weg ablenken,
    und nicht wieder nach Herodes lenken,
    denn weil Herodes eitel falsche List
    erdacht wider den Herrn Jesu Christ.

            (verschwindet.)

=Balthasar= _(erwachend.)_

    Auf, auf, ihr großen Könige mit mir,
    ein Engel im Traum erscheinet mir,
    daß wir sollen von dem Weg ablenken,
    und nicht wieder nach Herodes lenken,
    denn weil Herodes eitel falsche List,
    erdacht wider den Herrn Jesus Christ.

            (Die Könige gehen ab.)

=Der Engel= _(zu Joseph.)_

    Joseph, mein lieber Joseph mein,
    steh auf und nimm das Kindelein
    und seine Mutter bei der Hand
    und flieh mit ihr nach Aegyptenland,
    und bleib allda, bis ich sage dir,
    denn es ist Gefahr vorhanden hier,
    denn weil Herodes das Kindlein sucht,
    damit er es umbringen tut.

=Joseph= _(erwachend.)_

    Maria, Maria, steh auf und nimm das Kindelein,
    daß wirs bringen aus der Gefahr,
    dieweil es Herodes beschlossen gar,
    das Kindlein umzubringen zur Hand,
    so wollen wir wieder ziehen nach Aegyptenland.

    (Maria und Joseph rüsten sich zur Abreise.)

    Vorhang zu.

    Kurze musikalische Ueberleitung.




8. Das Spiel vom Kindermord.


    _Vordere Bühne._ Thronsessel. Herodes.

=Herodes.=

    O weih! o weih! alles Unglück auf mich herabbricht,
    Und da ich saß auf meinem Thron
    ein süßer Schlaf, der kam mir an.
    Kaum tat ich meine Augen zu,
    da kam ein Löw (b) in meine Ruh
    und stürzte mich von meinem Thron
    und riß von meinem Haupt herab die Kron.
    Mein ganz Gemüte in mir ergrimmt,
    daß mir fast das Herz im Leib zerspringt;
    dieweil ich nunmehr sehe an,
    daß mich die Weisen betrogen han.
    Auf, Kriegsknecht, rüste dich,
    hau und brenne, töt und stich,
    und laß dein Schwert den Kindern blutig wetzen
    und tu mir nicht ein einzigs auf die Seite setzen
    Wirst du das tun,
    so wird meine Kron auf festem Grunde ruhn.

=Laban.=

    Ganz gehorsam, ihr Königliche Majestät,
    was Sie mir anbefohlen haben, soll alsbald
    in Werk gerichtet werden.
    Denn weil er mirs hat anbefohlen, so will
    ich auch kein Kind verschonen.
    Ei, so will ich hinaus,
    will ziehen meinen Säbel heraus,
    will durchziehen durch das ganze jüdische Land
    will alle Knaben von 1 bis 2 Jahre töten.
    Was drunter ist, soll keins am Leben bleiben,
    und wenn die Eltern täten Blut weinen!

            (Ab.)

    Herodes ist auf seinen Sessel gesunken. Die Bühne wird
    _finster_. Der Chor singt hinter der Szene.

    Wenn wir in höchsten Nöten sein
    und wissen nicht, wo aus noch ein,
    und finden weder Hilf noch Rat,
    ob wir gleich sorgen früh und spat:

    So ist dies unser Trost allein,
    daß wir zusammen insgemein
    Dich rufen an, o treuer Gott,
    um Rettung aus der Angst und Not.

    Die Bühne wird hell.

=Laban= _(tritt wieder auf.)_

    Ei, ei, wie hat mein Schwert geschnitten,
    es half kein Flehen, es half kein Bitten,
    viel tausend Mann hab ich erschlagen --
    Trotzdem, der mir ein Wort kann sagen!
    die kleinen Kinder schrien erbärmlich,
    bei mir aber war ganz und gar kein Verschonen nich,
    nun hab ich abermals ihrer Königlichen Majestät Willen vollbracht,
    daß Sie nicht Ursach haben über mich zu klagen.
    Ich bin so tyrannisch mit ihn' umgegangen

    (schaudernd)

    es ist mir gewesen, als wenn ich nichts hätt ermachen können!

            (Ab.)

=Herodes.=

    Recht so, nichts davon gelogen!
    List muß wieder mit List belohnt werden!
    Der Anfang ist gemacht, wer mir wird wiederstehen,
    Der soll alsbald mit Schrecken untergehen,
    allein die Juden mögen mich lassen,
    sie müssen doch in Furcht die Macht sich dämpfen lassen.
    Mein Mut und Kampf ist mir von Jugend auf
    erhitzet und läßt auch noch nicht nach.
    Mein ist der Ruhm, mein ist die Ehr,
    Nun fürcht sich kein Herodes mehr!

            (Der Tod ist eingetreten.)

=Der Tod= _(mit Sense und Stundenglas.)_

(Lengefelder Spiel.)

    Ich bin der rechte Todesmann,
    ich muß alle Menschen han;
    sie mögen sein jung, alt oder schön,
    sie müssen alle mit mir gehn.
    Ich bin dir so ein Freiersmann,
    das Herz muß ich han.
    Ich nehm was siebzig oder achtzig Jahr,
    sie müssen alle mit mir auf die Bahr.
    Hör, was ich weiter werd sahn!
    Zuletzt werden sie ins Grab getan,
    Das Fleisch vergeht, verdorrt wie Heu.
    Der Mensch lebt nicht von Sünden frei;
    Hernach kommt auch der Sünden Sold.
    Was hilft dem Menschen sein Reichtum, Silber oder Gold? --
    Ich bin das Endelohn, des Sünders Gericht.
    Die schöne Gestalt ich acht auch nicht!

    Indem der Tod auf Herodes zugeht, schließt sich der Vorhang.


    Kurze Ueberleitung der Musik zu freundlichen Tönen.


    _Hintere Bühne_ (ohne Stall.)

    Joseph und Maria mit dem Kind unter einem Baum ruhend.

=Der Engel.=

    Merk, Joseph, du getreuer Mann,
    dir Gottes Willen ich zeige an.
    Steh auf und nimm eilends zu dir
    das Kindlein und die Mutter schier.
    Fürcht dich vor keinem Ungefäll
    und zeuch in das Land Israel,
    sie sein gestorben, die dem Kind
    nach seinem Leben gestanden sind.

            (Ab.)

=Joseph.=

    Hör, Maria, wir sollen schnell und behend
    reisen wieder nach Bethlehem,
    Gott wird uns auch erhalten bis an unser End!

    Der Vorhang schließt sich.

=Der Engel= _tritt vor denselben hinaus_.

(Cranzahler Spiel.)

    Nun hört, ihr großen Herrn und Frauen insgemein,
    wir bedanken uns auch recht fein,
    daß Sie uns fein zugehöret haben.
    Dafür wünschen wir ein glückliches neues Jahr!
    Und sollten wir noch gesund sein,
    so kommen wir nächstes Jahr wieder rein.
    Ich wollte wünschen, wir möchten einander
    mit Freuden willkommen sein!

=Schlußgesang= _(Allgemein.)_

    (Melodie: Lobt Gott, ihr Christen allzugleich.)

    Heut schleußt er wieder auf die Tür
    zum schönen Paradeis,
    Der Cherub steht nicht mehr dafür;
    Gott sei Lob, Ehr und Preis!

[Illustration]




Fußnoten


    [1] Weinhold, Seite 34.

    [2] Weinhold, Seite 122.

    [3] Mosen, Seite 17.

    [4] Nach Akt. d. Sächs. Hauptstaatsarchivs.

    [5] E. Griesner, in den Mitteil. des Vereins für Sächs. Volkskunde.

    [6] Friedrich August, genannt der Gerechte.

    [7] A. d. Mitteilungen für sächsische Volkskunde, Band 2.

        Lehrer Alwin Bergmann in Dresden. Beiträge zur Geschichte der
        Christmetten in Sachsen.

    [8] Bergmann, Beilage zur Geschichte der Christmetten in Sachsen.
        Mitteilung des Vereins für sächsische Volkskunde. Band 2,
        Heft 10.

    [9] John, Aberglaube, Sitte und Brauch im sächs. Erzgebirge.

    [10] Glückauf, Dezember 1890, Seite 128 und 129.

    [11] Mosen, Seite 17.

    [12] Mosen, Seite 17.

    [13] Ein niedliches Beispiel, wie sich das Volk die lateinische
        Sprache für seinen Mund zurechtmacht. Der Wortlaut der ~Vulgata~
        ist: ~Gloria in exelsis deo et in terra pax in hominibus bonae
        voluntatis.~

    [14] Der Herr Amtmann von Grünhain und Stollberg, worunter auch
        Thalheim gehört, wohnt etwas entfernt --, sonst wäre diesen
        Bettlern _wahrscheinlich_ ein anderer Platz als Wohnung
        angewiesen worden.

    [15] Friedrich August, der spätere König.

    [16] Die mündliche Ueberlieferung: »... bereitet ist -- Von
        Ewigkeit zu Ewigkeit« ist zwar inhaltlich besser, aber formell
        bedenklich.

    [17] mündl.; schriftlich: »Zu _dieser_ frist.«

    [18] Bei Aufführungen vor Kindern.

    [19] Musikalischer Anhang zu Mosens Weihnachtsspiel.

    [20] Der Hofnarr.

    [21] Musikalischer Anhang zu Mosens Weihnachtsfestspiele.




Quellen.


    ~Dr.~ _K. Weinhold_, Weihnachtsspiele und -lieder aus
      Süddeutschland und Schlesien, 1875

    _Mosen_, Weihnachtsspiele im sächsischen Erzgebirge, 1861

    Mitteilungen des Vereins für sächsische Volkskunde

    »Glück auf«, Zeitschrift des Erzgebirgsvereins

    _Bergmann_, Beiträge zur Geschichte der Christmetten in Sachsen

    _John_, Aberglaube, Sitte und Brauch im sächsischen Erzgebirge

    _Seyffert_, Dorf und Stadt

    _Alfred Müller_, Eine Mettenfahrt (Glück auf)

    Mitteilungen des sächsischen Altertumsvereins

    Akten des Hauptstaatsarchivs

    Kirchliche Nachrichten aus Zwickau und Umgegend 1890

    Bunte Bilder aus dem Sachsenlande

    _Wild_, Interessante Wanderungen durch das sächs. Erzgebirge,
      1809

    Mündliche Mitteilungen aus den verschiedensten Orten

    _Alfred Müller_, Ein altertümlicher Christumzug (Glück auf)

    Wissenschaftliche Beilage der Leipziger Zeitung, 1902

    _E. Giersner_, Ein Königsspiel (Mitteil. d. Ver. f. sächs.
      Volkskunde)

    Mitteilungen des Vereins für Geschichte der Deutschen in Böhmen
      1865

    _Löscher_, Bornkinnel

    _Bonns_, Deutsche Weihnacht

    _Gerstmann_, Eine kurtze Comedien von der Geburt des Herrn
      Christi

    _Nick_, Die Hof- und Volksnarren, 1861

    _Ostwein_, Deutsche Weihnachten

    _Wuttke_, Sächsische Volkskunde

    _Meyer_, Deutsche Volkskunde

    _Mogk_, Die deutschen Sitten und Bräuche (Meyer, Deutsches
      Volkstum)

    _Spieß_, Aberglaube, Sitten und Gebräuche des Obererzgebirges

    _Grohmann_, Das Obererzgebirge und seine Städte

    _Pailler_, Krippenspiele aus Oberösterreich und Tirol

    _Hartmann_, Weihnachtslied und Weihnachtsspiel in Oberbayern

    _Arnim_ und _Brentano_, Des Knaben Wunderhorn

    _Pröhle_, Weltliche und geistliche Volksschauspiele


      Vierteljahresschrift für Literaturgeschichte




Buchdruckerei Hesse & Kaufmann, Chemnitz.




    Weitere Anmerkungen zur Transkription


    Offensichtliche Fehler wurden stillschweigend korrigiert.
    Inkonsistente und fehlerhafte Schreibweisen in den überlieferten
    Texten wurden weitestgehend beibehalten.

    Korrekturen:

    S. 67: Ehrenthron → Ehrenkron
      drauf soll er sich setzen mit seiner {Ehrenkron}





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Erzgebirgische Christ- und Mettenspiele, by 
Max Wenzel

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ERZGEBIRGISCHE CHRIST- UND ***

***** This file should be named 59046-0.txt or 59046-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/9/0/4/59046/

Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

##BOOKSHELF##
